Title: 2604.26384v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.26384v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Apr 2026 00:33:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
Asset Administration Shell -Based OCL Validation Framework for Model -

# Based System Engineering 

Om Parkash * Jannik Bauer * Vincent Schmitt * Thomas Greiner* Rainer Drath* 

* IOS 3 – Institute of Smart Systems and Services, Pforzheim University of Applied Sciences ,

Pforzheim, Germany 

(e -mail s: {om.parkash, jannik.bauer, schmittv, thomas.greiner , rainer.drath }@hs -pforzheim.de )

> © 2026 the authors. This work has been accepted to IFAC for publication under a Creative Commons Licence CC -BY -NC -ND .

Abstract : Increasing complexity of modern enterprise systems and the demand for automation and 

interoperability require consistent and semantically validated models in Model -Based System s Engineering 

(MBSE ). The Object Constraint Language (OCL) supports formal definition of such constraint validations .

However, MBSE models and OCL constraints are typically managed in separate tools, causing manual 

effort during model constraint application and result interpretation. To address this gap, this paper proposes 

an approach to managing OCL constraints and thei r validation results through Asset Administration Shells 

(a well -established technology for interoperability in enterprise systems ). The methodology is demonstrated 

through a fictional industrial scenario, and to support reproducibility, all artifacts are publicly available in 

a GitHub repository 1.

Keywords : MBSE, OCL, AAS, Semantic Constraint Modeling , AutomationML 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Model -Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) is a formal 

approach to system development that relies on modeling 

(Bahill, 2018) (International Council on Systems Engineering 

(INCOSE), 2007) . MBSE methods are increasingly being 

adopted across industries because of their advantages over 

traditional document -based approaches (Boggero et al., 2021) .

These advantages include improved system design quality, 

better traceability of requirements, and clearer communication 

among development teams (Boggero et al., 2021) (Lemazurier 

et al., 2017) .

Different engineering domains have successfully applied 

MBSE to develop complex systems . For example, (Oudina et 

al., 2023) . presents the design of a modern industrial control 

and SCADA system for the oil and gas industry using an 

MBSE approach . (Castaing et al., 2023) provides a detailed 

example of applying MBSE to a planetary rover design case 

study . (Zheng et al., 2024) demonstrates the use of MBSE in 

constructing multi -energy coupling systems to manage 

adjustable loads and improve energy efficiency. (Bergelin et 

al., 2022) proposes a MBSE methodology for evaluating the 

feasibility of heterogeneous battery systems in the railway 

domain. 

In MBSE, the faithfulness, correctness and maintainability of 

models are central to developing robust systems, enabling 

analysis, verifying behavior, and supporting system evolution 

across different lifecycle phases (Mohagheghi & Aagedal, 

2007) . In Model -Driven Engineering (MDE), the Object 

Constraint Language (OCL) is used ; it is a textual specification 

language to define and enforce semantic constraints on data 

models. It provides a formal way to specify rules as constraints 

to ensure the correctness of model elements (Gogolla, 2013) . 

> 1

GitHub Repository:  https://github.com/omparkash -unipf/MBSE_AAS_OCL/tree/main 

However, OCL constraints and MBSE models are often 

modelled, stored and managed in separate models, tools or 

repositories. Typically, MBSE models are loaded into an 

environment that supports OCL, where the constraints are 

executed on metamodel instances. Once the constraint 

validation results are available, they are usually transferred to 

other systems manually or through scripts for further 

processing. As MBSE approaches are increasingly applied in 

industrial ecosystems, a challenge arises in organizing su ch 

semantic constraints in a systematic, scalable, and 

interoperable way. 

The Asset Administration Shell ( AAS ) is already a well -

known technology that supports interoperability, transparency, 

and efficient data usage in Industry 4.0 and is currently 

establishing itself in industry as a digital representation of 

assets, i.e. components (OPC Foundation, 2025) . AAS is 

therefore the first methodical and systematic approach to 

describing industrial systems at the component level in a 

standardized manner across manufacturers using semantic data 

models. To do this, standardized submodels are combined. 

However, even at this level, there is no possibility of defining 

OCL constraints in AAS or managing their validation results 

using AAS itself. This contr ibution therefore proposes a novel 

approach of combining constraints with AAS and suggests a

complete workflow for managing semantic OCL constraints 

for information models using AAS by creating the necessary 

submodels. In this approach, AAS acts as a central integration 

layer that connects models and constraint -related data . The 

authors present a methodology along with the required 

components to achieve this. In the end, a fictional industrial 

scenario is created which demonstrates the workflow, and all 

related files and scripts are available in a publi c GitHub 

repository 1. The rest of the paper is organized as follows :Chapter II  reviews related work,  Chapter III  explains the core 

idea and methodology,  Chapter IV  presents  the methdodology 

implementation workflow, Chapter V presents the  application 

with a use case example  and  Chapter V I summarizes the main 

results and outlines future work .

2.  RELATED WORK 

OCL (Object Management Group (OMG), 2014) (Cabot & 

Gogolla, 2012) is a textual language for specifying semantic 

constraints and has been applied in various domains. For 

example, (Siala & Lano, 2025) uses large language models to 

automatically derive OCL constraints from existing 

Java/Python code. (Ahmed et al., 2024) employes OCL as a 

formal specification language to define ATM system behavior 

and detect errors early. Additionally, (Ali et al., 2014) reports 

practical guidance and industrial experiences in applying OCL 

across different projects. A s tudy done by (Ferdjoukh et al., 

2015) focuses on embedding OCL constraints into model 

generation using constraint programming .

Related work has also examined the storage of OCL validation 

results in files. (Barisas & Bareisa, 2009) demonstrate storage 

of OCL -based artifacts —such as generated test paths —as well 

as detailed execution results, including object states, in 

dedicated files. Similarly (Izsó et al., 2014) propose a

framework for assessing the scalability of MDE approaches by 

validating models using hand -written OCL queries. Their 

architecture includes language -specific modules for serializing 

OCL queries into files and provides built -in mechanisms for 

storing valid ation results, including the set of constraint 

violations and the execution time required for each OCL 

check. 

The AAS is a digital  representation  of a physical asset. It is 

composed of multiple submodels that capture the asset’s data 

and functions. It enables various communication interfaces 

and acts as the bridge between the asset and the digital world 

(Neidig et al., 2022) .

Several studies explore the combination of AAS with semantic 

constraint mechanisms. For example (Rimaz, 2024) 

investigates AAS and SHACL -based constraint verification 

for semantic digital twins, while (Eichelberger & Weber, 

2024) addresses model -driven generation of AAS submodels. 

(Miny et al., 2020) demonstrate how OCL can be applied to 

generate well -formed AAS submodels, highlighting the 

applicability of OCL as a formal mechanism for enriching 

AAS structures with precise semantic constraints. 

The File submodel element (SME) in the AAS allows the 

attachment of relevant data files to assets or components (IEC, 

2022) . File embedding within the AAS has been previously 

explored; for instance, (Fan et al., 2023) recommend attaching 

important engineering files to the File SME to ensure that all 

digital information required for planning and executing 

specific process steps is available directly within the AAS. 

AutomationML (AML) allows modelling, storage and 

exchange of complex technical systems and is designed for 

exchanging engineering data and covers a multitude of 

relevant aspects in engineering (IEC, 2018) (Drath, 2021) . It is 

based on comprehensive XML based object -oriented data 

modeling language . For example, (R. Gudder et al., 2024) 

propose a data transformation approach which utilizes AML 

as a standardized data format to transform and integrate 

engineering data from multiple domains into a single, unified 

AML data model for a complex production system .

At last , (Alvarado et al., 2025) identif y the limitation that the 

current AAS metamodel does not natively support the 

representation of OCL rules. Therefore, authors of mentioned 

article propose mapping OCL validation results into property 

SMEs of type Boolean, providing a workaround for integrating 

constraint verification outcomes into the AAS structure. 

However, to the best of our knowledge, no existing study 

investigates how OCL constraints and their corresponding 

validation outcomes can be managed using AAS. To address 

this gap, the present article proposes a complete workflow for 

managing semantic OCL constraints and their validation 

results within the AAS, by creating the necessary submodels 

to connect models, and their constraint definitions where AAS 

is being used as the central integration layer. Hence, authors 

define both OCL constraints and the co rresponding validation 

results as files and integrate them into dedicated submodels of 

AAS to ensure interoperability. 

3.  METHODOLOGY 

This chapter presents  a methodology  and  conceptual approach 

for managing semantic OCL constraints and their validation 

results within the AAS . The goal of the methodology is to 

enable consistent representation and management of semantic 

correctness of system’s information in a manner that it is 

machine -interpretable and interoperable across industrial 

systems like Manufacturing Execution Systems ( MES ), digital 

twins or domain systems .

The  proposed  methodology consists of  five  conceptual  steps 

(S1, S2, S3, S4, S5) . The description and workflow of the steps 

is shown in  Fig.  1:

S1: Semantic representation of system 

S2: Constraint representation of system 

S3: Integration of semantic and constraint models within 

AA S

S4: A generic mechanism for constraint validation 

S5: Constraint result fetch by MES, digital twins or domain 

systems 

These elements together define how domain knowledge, 

structural rules, and dynamic runtime information can be 

jointly represented and evaluated in an industry 4.0 

environment. 

3.1  Description of proposed  steps 

S1: Semantic representation of system 

At the conceptual level, system semantics consists of two 

parts: 

(1)  Type -level semantics, which describe the structural and 

functional characteristics of a system or an asset. (2)  Instance -level semantics, which contain the concrete 

values and configuration information of a specific 

system or asset. 

Both types of semantics form a unified knowledge model. The 

methodology assumes that these models are expressed in a 

formal modeling language so that their structure and semantics 

can be interpreted and validated by software systems. 

S2: Constraint representation of system 

Semantic models alone cannot capture correctness conditions, 

dependencies, and logical rules. Therefore, the methodology 

suggests creating formal semantic constraints that express 

rules about how system models are expected to behave. These 

constraints are represented using the formal constraint 

language (e.g. OCL). 

S3: Integration of semantic and constraint models within AAS 

The methodology organizes semantics and constraints within 

the AAS so that other systems can understand and use them. 

Therefore, the AAS serves as the conceptual container that 

organizes semantic information models, constraint models and 

the resulting vali dation information. 

The authors propose the introduction of two dedicated 

conceptual submodels: 

(1)  Semantic  information submodel: Organizes the type and 

instance semantics .

(2)  Semantic constraint submodel: Organizes the constraint 

definitions and exposes them in a standardized, machine -

readable way. 

S4: A generic mechanism for constraint validation 

The methodology further defines a workflow that connects 

semantic modeling, constraints and the AAS in following 

steps :

(1)  A generic validation mechanism retrieves semantic 

models and constraints from AAS whenever validation 

is required. 

(2)  If semantic  information models  and constraint models 

are  created  in different modeling environments, the 

mechanism  should  convert the semantic models into a 

format that the constraint model can interpret for 

enforcing constraints. 

(3)  The mechanism evaluates whether the semantic model 

satisfies the domain constraints. 

(4)  The validation result (e.g. rule satisfied, violated) is 

written back into the AAS .

S5: Constraint result fetch ing by MES , digital twins or domain 

systems 

Once the constraint validation results are generated, other 

systems such as MES, digital twins, or domain -specific 

systems can retrieve these results. They use the pass/violation 

information for tasks such as checking model correctness, 

ensuring data quality, detecting design or process issues, 

verifying control logic, speeding up verification processes, and 

maintaining overal l data integrity. 

4.  IMPLEMENTATION WORKFLOW 

To support the application of the proposed methodology, a 

implementation workflow is illustrated in  Fig. 2. The 

conceptual methodology defines the abstract steps (S1 -S5) , the 

implementation workflow shows one practical way to execute 

these steps and demonstrates how AAS structure and 

validation flow operate . This workflow is a suggestion by 

authors and can be adapted to individual requirements. The 

implementation recommends creating two dedicated AASs ;

one for system’s semantic representation and one for 

constraint representation. A single AAS can also handle both 

purposes , but separate AASs are proposed here for clarity . The 

implementation workflow can be carried out as f ollows: 

(1)  S1 Type -level and Instance -level semantics can be 

modeled using AML and integrated in File SMEs 

(InformationModel_Type, InformationModel_Instance )

of AAS1 (S3). 

(2)  Dynamic system attributes can be represented into 

Property SME s (Dynamic_Attribute1, 

Dynamic_Attribute2 ) within AAS1 (S3). 

(3)  The Relationship SME in S3 can be used to represent the 

semantic links between dynamic attribute s and the 

corresponding type and instance model s.

(4)  S2 Constraints can be modeled using OCL and 

integrated in to the File SME (Constraint_Model ) of 

AAS2 (S3) .       

> Fig. 1.Conceptual architecture for semantic and constraint integration in the AAS and its 5 conceptual steps S1 -S5

(5)  An OCL Validation Component (OVC) is developed in 

th is study to provide the constraint validation 

mechanism (S4) . The tool is currently under 

development. In th is study, it is specifically designed to 

process AML files integrated within the AAS. 

To validate OCL constraints over AML systems models, 

the AML models must first be transform ed into XML 

Metadata Interchange (XMI) (Object Management 

Group (OMG), 2015) format , which is compatible by 

Eclipse Modeling Framework ( EMF ). This means type -

level AML files are converted in to EMF ecore files , and 

instance -level AML files are converted in to xmi files. 

The tool operates in the following five steps: 

1.  Fetch type model: Fetches the 

InformationModel_Type file from AAS1 and 

converts it into ecore format. 

2.  Fetch instance model: Retrieves the 

InformationModel_Instance file from AAS1 and 

maps its attribute values into an xmi instance. 

3.  Inject dynamic values: Retrieves the dynamic 

attribute values from the Property SMEs in AAS1 

and updates the corresponding attributes in xmi 

instance models .

4.  Fetch OCL constraints: Retrieves the OCL 

constraint models from AAS2 and performs OCL 

validation on xmi instances. 

5.  Write results: Generates the validation results in text 

file and serializes them into JSON/XML, storing the 

output in AAS2 for machine -readable processing. 

File fetching, file integration, and dynamic attribute retrieval 

in the AAS can be performed using REST APIs. For this 

purpose, Eclipse BaSyx, an open -source platform (Eclipse 

BaSyx, 2025) is used as it provides a unified interface for 

deploying AASs and their submodels. A full description of the 

generic BaSyx AAS HTTP REST APIs can be found in 

(Eclipse BaSyx Project, 2020) .

5.  APPLICATION  SCENARIO 

To demonstrate the applicability of proposed methodology, a 

small fictional industrial scenario is implemented. The 

scenario represents a simplified production facility consisting 

of four sequential manufacturing processes. The purpose of the 

implementation is to show semantic information models and 

formal OCL constraints can be represented, validated, and 

managed using AAS. As stated in (Industrial Digital Twin 

Association (IDTA), 2020) , an industrial facility can be 

considered an asset with its own AAS and can be accessed 

through its ID. This allows an entire system to be modeled in 

the AAS by representing it as a single asset or component. 

All files created for the demonstration are available in a public 

GitHub repository 1.

5.1  Industrial  use  case  description 

The production system consists of four intermediate processes ,

as shown in  Table 1, which are executed on the shop floor to 

manufacture the final product. In the setup, three constraints 

have been considered, as shown in  Table 2. Among the 

mentioned constraints, the AppropriateTemperature constraint 

has already been solved in terms of control technology. Here 

this constraint is just taken for example purpose. 

The remaining two constraints are newly introduced and play 

a critical role in industrial scenarios, particularly in process 

rescheduling . These constraint s are highly relevant because 

process rescheduling is often required in manufacturing 

settings for several purposes , for example, optimizing energy 

costs by shifting energy -intensive processes to periods of 

lower energy prices, or managing machine breakdowns, where 

all tasks assigned to a failed machine must be reassigned to            

> Fig. 2.Workflow for methodology implementation using the proposed AAS Structures and constraint validation mechanism
> Table 1.Manufacturing processes in the production scenario
> with their attributes and values

Process  Process Type  Process 

Sequence 

Order 

IntermediateProcessA  A 1

IntermediateProcessB  B 2

IntermediateProcessC  C 3

IntermediateProcessD  D 4alternative time slots. A detailed description of these files, 

along with additional relevant information, is provided in 

Table 3. All created semantic and constraint models of the 

system , along with their validation results , are integrated into 

AAS instances created specifically for this study.  Table 4

shows this integration. 

Fig. 3 depicts the structure of the AAS created to represent se -

mantic system model , while  Fig. 4 shows the AAS structure 

developed to represent the constraint models and 

corresponding validation results . This setup demonstrates 

how an AAS can serve as a unified container for both semantic 

model info -formation and validation data. 

5.2  Mechanism for constraint validation 

In this example, the transformations between AML, Ecore, 

XMI as well as the constraint evaluations, are performed 

manually. In future, the authors aim for automatic execution of 

these steps by means of t he prototype OVC tool, enabling real -

time semantic validation directly based on the AML models 

integrated in AAS.        

> Fig. 3.Information models AAS, showing submodel
> structure and integrated files. Fig. 4.Constraint models and validation results AAS, showing
> submodels structure and integrated files.
> Table 2.Constraints name, description and their importance in manufacturing facility

Constraint  Constraint Name  Constraint Description  Constraint importance 

1.  UniqueProcessOrderConstraint  Ensures that the sequence 

order value of the 

manufacturing processes 

is always unique 

This ensures the proper execution of 

ProcessSequenceConstraint 

2.  ProcessSequenceConstraint  Ensures that the execution 

of manufacturing 

processes remains fixed 

and cannot be altered 

The dependencies between the 

manufacturing process steps are necessary 

so that the MES knows which sequence to 

follow in case of process rescheduling. 

3.  AppropriateTemperature  Ensures that the 

temperature of 

manufacturing facility 

should be appropriate 

An appropriate shop floor temperature is 

required to avoid defects in final product.   

> Table 3.Created model files and generated constraint result files with designated filenames

Aspect/Purpose  Semantic Representation  of System  (AML)  Constraint Representation  of 

System  (EMF/OCL) 

Type -level Model  DemoProductionProcessesTypemodel.aml  — defines 

generic process structure and shopfloor hierarchy 

demo.ecore  — defines type -level 

system structure + OCL constraints 

(constraint logic) 

Instance -level Model  DemoShopfloorInstanceModel.aml  — concrete values 

for processes and facility 

Demo_ShopFloor_Successful .xmi 

and 

Demo_ShopFloor_Violated .xmi  —

instance values used for validation 

Static Attributes  Defined directly in AML instance model (e.g., 

processType , processSequenceOrder )

Present in XMI instance models; 

validated by OCL constraints 

Dynamic Attributes  Represented using AAS  Property  SME (e.g., 

currentTemperature ),  which  can be  updated in real time 

Not stored in XMI; OCL can 

reference them through integration 

Validation Artifacts  ______  Validation result files (text +

JSON), serialized via 

ResultSerialization.py 5.3  Result and Discussion 

The validation result files (text and JSON) integrated in the 

submodel (Model_Validation_Results ) as in  Fig. 4, show the 

results of applying the constraints to the two instance XMI 

files stored in the File SME of the submodel 

(Semantic_Constraint_Models ) in the same AAS. In the 

successful instance, all constraints were validated without any 

violations, confirming that the modeled process sequence and 

temperature values are correct. In contrast, the violating 

instance triggered errors for all three constrai nts, showing non 

unique process orders, an incorrect sequence, and a

temperature above the allowed limit. 

These results show that OCL constraints can be reliably 

managed using the AAS, which supports automated quality 

checks in MBSE environments. The article also highlights the 

potential of the OVC to reduce manual effort and improve 

automation in constraint v alidation .

6.  SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 

Th is paper presen ts a method and a workflow for managing 

semantic OCL constraints and their validation results using the 

AAS as a central integration layer in the MBSE context. The 

workflow was demonstrated through a fictional industrial use 

case. All models and files created for this examp le are 

available in a public GitHub repository 1. An automatic 

constraint validation tool, the OVC, was introduced to support 

model transformation, constraint execution, and result storage, 

reducing manual effort. 

Future work aims to further develop the OVC tool to enable 

fully automated OCL constraint validation and result 

extraction , as well as extending the set of constraints to cover 

real industrial scenarios. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This work was carried out as part of the greenProd project 

funded by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and 

Climate Protection under the funding code ‘01MN23003B’, 

and the authors would like to express their thanks for the 

funding. The responsibility for the content of this work lies 

with the authors.  OpenAI’s ChatGPT was used to  check 

grammar and spelling .

REFERENCES 

Ahmed, I., Naseer, S., Umm -e-Habiba, Mahmood, J., 

Chaudhry, S. A., & Batool, K. (2024). Formal Model of 

ATM Based on Object Constraint Language (OCL).  2024 

International Conference on Engineering and Emerging 

Technologies (ICEET) , 1–6. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEET65156.2024.10913858 

Ali, S., Yue, T., Zohaib Iqbal, M., & Panesar -Walawege, R. K. 

(2014). Insights on the Use of OCL in Diverse Industrial 

Applications. In D. Amyot, P. Fonseca i Casas, & G. 

Mussbacher (Eds.),  System Analysis and Modeling: Models 

and Reusability  (pp. 223 –238). Springer International 

Publishing. 

Alvarado, J., Vegetti, M., & Gonnet, S. (2025). Asset 

Administration Shell Submodel for Representing the 

Procedural Part of ISA -88 Recipes.  IEEE Latin America 

Transactions , 23 , 36 –42. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TLA.2025.10810401 

Bahill, A. T. (2018).  Model -Based Systems Engineering .

https://doi.org/10.1201/9780203746936 

Barisas, D., & Bareisa, E. (2009).  Software System Testing 

Method Based on State Transitions .

https://isd.ktu.lt/it2009/material/Proceedings/ISS/ISS_3.pdf 

Bergelin, J., Cicchetti, A., & Lundin, E. (2022). Early 

validation of heterogeneous battery systems in the railway 

domain.  2022 IEEE International Systems Conference 

(SysCon) , 1–8. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/SysCon53536.2022.9773852 

Boggero, L., Ciampa, P. D., & Nagel, B. (2021, July 28).  An 

MBSE Architectural Framework for the Agile Definition of 

System Stakeholders, Needs and Requirements . AIAA 

AVIATION 2021 Forum. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2021 -

3076 

Cabot, J., & Gogolla, M. (2012). Object Constraint Language 

(OCL): A Definitive Guide. In M. Bernardo, V. Cortellessa, 

& A. Pierantonio (Eds.),  Formal Methods for Model -Driven   

> Table 4.AAS submodel structures for system and constraint representation and their integrated files for use

AAS Instance  Submodel  Contents/Purpose 

AAS1 -Information  Models  Semantic Information 

Models 

• AML_InformationModel_Type (type -level semantics) 

• AML_InformationModel_Instance (instance -level 

semantics) 

• Dynamic  attribute  (currentTemperature ) in property 

SME 

• Semantic relationships between model  files (type and 

instance) 

AAS2 -Constraint  Models 

and  Validation  Results 

Semantic Constraint Models  • Ecore model (type -level strucutre + OCL constraints )

• XMI instance models ( created  for  both, successful and 

violated  constraint validation) 

Model Validation Results  • Validation result files ( text + Json; text file is serialized 

into Json format using script ResultSerialization.py )

• Relationship  SMEs linking xmi instance models with 

their  corresponding  validation outcome  files .Engineering  (Vol. 7320, pp. 58 –90). Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642 -30982 -3_3 

Castaing, H., Tang, G., Chacin, & Bonnefoi, F. (2023). 

Application of Model -Based System Engineering to a

Planetary Rover Design.  2023 11th International 

Conference on Control, Mechatronics and Automation 

(ICCMA) , 43 –48. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCMA59762.2023.10374840 

Drath, R. (2021).  AutomationML - A Practical Guide . Boston: 

De Gruyter Oldenbourg. 

https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110746235 

Eclipse BaSyx. (2025).  Why using Eclipse Basyx as Industrie 

4.0 middleware? 

https://wiki.basyx.org/en/latest/content/introduction/why_b 

asyx.html 

Eclipse BaSyx Project. (2020).  BaSyx Asset Administration 

Shell HTTP REST -API . SwaggerHub. 

https://app.swaggerhub.com/apis/BaSyx/basyx_asset_admi 

nistration_shell_http_rest_api/v1 

Eichelberger, H., & Weber, A. (2024). Model -Driven 

Realization of IDTA Submodel Specifications: The Good, 

the Bad, the Incompatible?  2024 IEEE 29th International 

Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory 

Automation (ETFA) , 1–8. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ETFA61755.2024.10710924 

Fan, Z., Shi, D., Meyer, O., Seidelmann, J., & Wang, H. (2023). 

Asset Administration Shell -based Flexible Manufacturing 

System . 1–6. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPS58381.2023.10128027 

Ferdjoukh, A., Baert, A., Bourreau, E., Chateau, A., Coletta, 

R., & Nebut, C. (2015). Instantiation of meta -models 

constrained with OCL: A CSP approach.  2015 3rd 

International Conference on Model -Driven Engineering and 

Software Development (MODELSWARD) , 213 –222. 

Gogolla, M. (2013).  Employing the Object Constraint 

Language in Model -Based Engineering  (Vol. 7949). 

Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642 -39013 -5_1 

IEC. (2018).  Engineering data exchange format for use in 

indus-trial automation systems engineering 

(AutomationML)  – Part 1: Archi-tecture and general 

requirements, Edition 2  (No. IEC 62714 Ed. 2). International 

Electro-technical Commission. 

IEC. (2022).  Asset Administration Shell for industrial 

applications  – Part 1: Asset Administration Shell structure 

(No. PREN IEC 63278 -1:2022). 

Industrial Digital Twin Association (IDTA). (2020).  Details of 

the Asset Administration Shell .

https://industrialdigitaltwin.org/wp -

content/uploads/2021/09/07_details_of_the_asset_administ 

ration_shell_part1_v3_en_2020.pdf 

International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE). 

(2007).  Systems Engineering Vision 2020  (No. INCOSE -

TP -2004 -004 -02). International Council on Systems 

Engineering (INCOSE). https://sdincose.org/wp -

content/uploads/2011/12/SEVision2020_20071003_v2_03. 

pdf 

Izsó, B., Szárnyas, G., Ráth, I., & Varro, D. (2014). MONDO -

SAM: A Framework to Systematically Assess MDE 

Scalability.  CEUR Workshop Proceedings. 1206. , 40 –43. 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/286005882_MO 

NDO -

SAM_A_framework_to_systematically_assess_MDE_scala 

bility 

Lemazurier, L., Chapurlat, V., & Grossetête, A. (2017).  An 

MBSE Approach to Pass from Requirements to Functional 

Architecture . 50 (1), 7260 –7265. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08.1376 

Miny, T., Thies, M., Epple, U., & Diedrich, C. (2020). Model 

Transformation for Asset Administration Shells.  IECON 

2020 The 46th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial 

Electronics Society , 2207 –2212. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/IECON43393.2020.9254649 

Mohagheghi, P., & Aagedal, J. (2007). Evaluating Quality in 

Model -Driven Engineering.  International Workshop on 

Modeling in Software Engineering (MISE’07: ICSE 

Workshop 2007) , 6–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/MISE.2007.6 

Neidig, J., Orzelski, A., & Pollmeier, S. (2022).  Asset 

administration shell reading guide (as of January 2022) .

Plattform Industrie 4.0. https://www.plattform -

i40.de/IP/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Publikation/AAS -

ReadingGuide_202201.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=1 

Object Management Group (OMG). (2014).  Object Constraint 

Language (OCL), Version 2.4  [Specification]. 

https://www.omg.org/spec/OCL/2.4/About -OCL 

Object Management Group (OMG). (2015, June).  XML 

Metadata Interchange (XMI) Specification .

https://www.omg.org/spec/XMI 

OPC Foundation. (2025).  Introduction to the Asset 

Administration Shell .

https://reference.opcfoundation.org/I4AAS/v100/docs/4.1 

Oudina, Z., Derdour, M., Dib, A., & Tachouche, A. M. A. 

(2023). Model Based System Engineering for trust SCADA 

and ICS Systems in Oil & Gas Industry.  2023 5th 

International Conference on Pattern Analysis and 

Intelligent Systems (PAIS) , 1–8. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/PAIS60821.2023.10321993 

R. Gudder, D. Hoffmann, P. Hünecke, & A. Lüder. (2024). 

Integrated Engineering Data Transformation: An 

AutomationML -Based Approach for Efficient Data 

Exchange.  2024 IEEE 29th International Conference on 

Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA) ,

01 –04. https://doi.org/10.1109/ETFA61755.2024.10710965 

Rimaz, M. H. (2024).  Semantic Asset Administration Shell for 

Circular Economy .

https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.33957.10729 

Siala, H. A., & Lano, K. (2025). Towards Using LLMs in the 

Reverse Engineering of Software Systems to Object 

Constraint Language.  2025 IEEE International Conference 

on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering 

(SANER) , 1–6. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER64311.2025.00096 

Zheng, K., Wang, P., Zhang, S., Cao, Y., Li, Z., & Chang, L. 

(2024). MBSE Multi -Energy Coupling System Planning 

Strategy Considering the Load of the Industrial Park.  2024 

5th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and 

Electromechanical Automation (AIEA) , 1–7. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/AIEA62095.2024.10692506