Title: AutoCedar: An Agentic Framework for Verifier-Guided Access Control Policy Synthesis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.03656v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 01:23:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# AUTO CEDAR : An Agentic Framework for Verifier-Guided Access Control Policy Synthesis 

Adarsh Vatsa, Sachi Shome, Yingming Zhou, and William Eiers 

Stevens Institute of Technology 

{avatsa, sshome, yzhou136, weiers }@stevens.edu 

Abstract —Large Language Models are increasingly used to turn natural-language requirements into code. In access control, that shortcut is dangerous: a generated policy can compile and read correctly while granting access that no one approved. The difficulty is not only writing policy code. It is fixing what the requirements mean before code is written, and then checking that the final policy actually satisfies that intent. We present AUTO CEDAR , a verifier-guided system that first turns natural-language access-control requirements into a reviewed, checkable target, and then synthesizes Cedar policies against that target. AUTO CEDAR decomposes schema and policy authoring into small intent atoms: reviewable claims about vocabulary and behavior. Once those atoms pass mechanical validation and human intent review, the model proposes a candidate policy, the verifier checks it against the approved target, and each failure is turned into a repair signal that tells the model whether to broaden, narrow, or restructure the policy without changing the target. Because the model’s work is split into small problems, each grounded in reviewed intent and backed by verifier feedback, end-to-end policy authoring becomes tractable. A UTO CEDAR converges on all 221 tasks of CedarBench, our benchmark of authorization tasks paired with executable semantic boundaries. Across three requirements-corpus case studies covering healthcare, education, and conference management, A UTO CEDAR converts noisy prose and extracted access-control fragments into reviewed schemas, formal checks, and a globally verified Cedar policy store for each scenario. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Access control is ubiquitous across deployed software sys-tems, yet the gap between natural-language access control requirements and the formal policies that enforce them remains a persistent source of misconfiguration and vulnerability. This gap makes access control the most common source of security failures: it ranks first in the OWASP Top 10 and appeared in every tested application in their survey [1]. What makes these failures so persistent is not that any single access control rule is hard to write; individual rules can look reasonable while combining to permit or deny requests no author intended. Instead, it is that correctness is a property of the entire system: a policy is correct only when its entire set of rules, taken together, permits exactly the requests it should and no others. This problem compounds in modern software development, where AI tools now author a large and growing share of committed code. Fewer than half of developers say they always verify AI-generated code before it ships, and a substantial share report that reviewing it takes more effort than reviewing human-written code [2]. Authorization logic is not exempt: more of it is being generated, faster, by systems with no internal signal for whether a rule matches intent. Automated vulnerability discovery throws the resulting gap into relief rather than closing it: Anthropic’s Project Glasswing reports that around fifty partners using Claude Mythos have found more than ten thousand critical vulnerabilities in important software, and similarly a parallel scan of over a thousand open-source projects surfaced 6,202 high or critical findings out of 23,019 candidates, yet the disclosed bugs are overwhelmingly memory-safety failures and cryptographic defects, with autho-rization logic barely represented [3]. The reason is structural: a memory bug carries its own ground truth, since a buffer overflow trips a sanitizer and crashes with no statement of intent required, while “user A can read user B’s record” is a defect only relative to a policy the code never states. The moment when more authorization logic is being written by fewer human eyes is also the moment when the field’s most powerful bug-finders are least able to catch it. Which makes correctness at authoring time, not detection after deployment, the place where the leverage actually lies. A natural tool for authoring-time correctness is the large language model, which can turn natural-language requirements into policy text directly [4], [5]. But a model can produce a syntactically valid, plausible-looking policy that is semanti-cally wrong, with no internal signal that anything is off: Vatsa et al. [5] report that policies written via roundtrip generation have semantic equivalence rates of 45.8% for non-reasoning models and 93.7% for reasoning models relative to the ground-truth policies. A natural response is to pair the model with a verifier, so that correctness guarantees come from the verifier rather than the model, separating generation from checking. We argue this is only half of the problem: the requirements themselves are usually incomplete, leaving cases unsaid. No amount of verification against an under-specified, informal intent can fill that gap. The Cedar [6] policy language makes verification more tractable since policies are declarative, typed against an explicit schema, and open to symbolic comparison so the property we want is not that a generated policy looks reasonable, but that the set of requests it permits falls inside a reviewed authorization boundary. This boundary does not exist in ordinary requirements text; it has to be constructed, reviewed, and kept fixed while the policy is synthesized. In this work we present A UTO CEDAR , which constructs that reviewed boundary by completing intent rather than merely translating requirements into policy text. Instead of treating the requirements as a finished specification, A UTO CEDAR surfaces 

> arXiv:2607.03656v1 [cs.SE] 4 Jul 2026

their gaps during authoring: when the requirements leave something unsaid, a property the schema cannot yet support triggers a repair that the reviewer resolves, so the intent is com-pleted before the policy is finalized rather than left implicit. AUTO CEDAR converges on all 221 tasks of CedarBench, our benchmark of authorization tasks paired with executable semantic boundaries, and across three ACRE/REDE-derived requirements corpora for healthcare, education, and conference management it turns fragments that cannot be deployed on their own into globally checked Cedar policy stores. Because that completed intent is recorded explicitly rather than baked silently into the final rules, A UTO CEDAR also produces a durable, updatable log of intent: when requirements change, the log is edited and a fresh, verified policy is re-authored from it, making the system not a one-shot synthesizer but a substrate for ongoing policy maintenance. It thus turns text expressing access-control intent, in any format, into deployable, verified Cedar. The contribution is the boundary-preserving authoring loop: A UTO CEDAR fixes what the policy is supposed to mean, keeps that target outside the model’s control, and uses verifier evidence to search for policy code that satisfies it. 

Contributions. We make four contributions. 1) AUTO CEDAR , a verifier-guided authoring loop that turns fragmented natural-language access-control intent into a reviewed Cedar schema and boundary plan of floors, ceilings, liveness slices, and derived checks. 2) A CEGIS-style synthesis discipline for LLM policy gen-eration: the model proposes candidates, the verifier owns the target, failure history, and accept/reject decision. 3) A signal-layer contract that translates verifier evidence into target-preserving repair packets across target admis-sion, semantic direction, local Cedar diagnostics, and search history. 4) CedarBench, a 221-scenario verification benchmark, plus three ACRE/REDE-derived case studies showing end-to-end transformation from NL/NLACP intent into deployable, globally checked Cedar policy stores. The implementation, benchmarks, and reproduction materials are available at https://github.com/neselab/ cedar-synthesis-engine. II. B ACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES 

A. Cedar Policy Language 

Cedar is a language for writing authorization policies and making authorization decisions based on those policies [6], [7]. We now summarize the relevant elements of Cedar below. 

Schema. A Cedar schema Σ fixes the vocabulary that policies are permitted to reference. It defines the types of entities recognized by the application or context in which the policy operates. The entities include principals (who is doing the access), actions (what is being performed), resources (what is being accessed), and context (environment information) referenced in policies. Cedar uses Σ to validate policies at authoring time, ensuring that every entity, attribute, and action a policy references is consistent with Σ.

Policies. A Cedar policy π is a set of one or more declarative rules which describes what principals can perform which 

actions on which resources in what context . π specifies the 

effect , scope , and optional conditions :

effect (principal , action , resource )[ when φ1][ unless φ2]

where effect ∈ { permit , forbid }; scope restricts which principals, actions, and resources the policy applies to; φ1,φ2

are boolean conditions over entity attributes drawn from Σ.

B. Terminology 

Requests, schemas, and policies. We write a Cedar au-thorization request as ρ = (p, α, o, γ ): principal, action, resource, and context. For a fixed schema Σ, these declarations induce the request universe RΣ, the domain over which every comparison, witness, and certification claim is quantified. A policy bundle P is a finite set of permit and forbid rules guarded by Cedar conditions. 

Permit-set denotation. Once Σ fixes the universe, two policy texts should be compared by behavior. Cedar uses deny-overrides semantics: a request is permitted only when at least one matching permit applies and no matching forbid 

applies. We write sem Σ(P ) = {ρ ∈ RΣ | permit Σ(P, ρ )}

for the permit-set denotation of P , writing sem( P ) when Σ

is fixed. Two different Cedar encodings are equivalent for synthesis when they permit exactly the same requests. 

Symbolic policy comparison. Cedar comes with a symbolic compiler cedar symcc which translates Cedar policies into SMT formulae, enabling comparison between policies through formulae satisfiability. symcc allows us to compare the permit sets over the supported Cedar fragment rather than over a finite test suite. For policy bundles P1 and P2, it can decide inclusion 

sem( P1) ⊆ sem( P2), equivalence sem( P1) = sem( P2), and satisfiability or emptiness properties; when an inclusion check fails, it returns a concrete request in the relevant set difference. This follows the same lineage as SMT-based policy analyzers such as Zelkova [8]. The property we use is that many requirements can themselves be encoded as Cedar policies. III. A UTO CEDAR 

AUTO CEDAR starts from a problem that a direct translator cannot solve: policy text cannot be checked until the intended behavior has been made checkable. The system therefore has two jobs. First, it turns requirements into a reviewed semantic target over a Cedar schema. Then it lets an LLM search for policy text while a verifier checks candidates against the target. 

A. Overview 

The failure mode of direct LLM synthesis is simple: policy text gets written before intent is fixed. A UTO CEDAR reverses this order, turning requirements into a reviewed, checkable target before the model proposes any candidate. Figure 1 shows the full workflow, and Algorithm 1 spells out the control flow. Requirements enter as a document D.AUTO CEDAR indexes D into a source DAG GD , then pro-poses schema atoms and property atoms from bounded source Reviewed target: fixed before candidate search 

GD

source DAG 

A

approved atoms 

Σ

schema 

Π

plan 

F, C, G

compiled checks 

> Untrusted proposal, deterministic checking

mt

repair 

LLM proposer 

Pt

candidate 

Cedar checker 

Qt

records 

evidence 

(Σ , Π, P, T )

signal layer Φ: outcome class, direction, witness, provenance, history 

T trace source → atom → boundary check → candidate clause  

> all pass
> fixed target
> failures next mt+1

Fig. 1. AUTO CEDAR as fixed-target construction plus verifier-guided search. Raw requirements D are indexed into a source DAG GD : stable source nodes and bounded context packets used to propose atoms. A is the set of approved schema and property atoms, Σ is the Cedar schema, Π is the boundary plan, and 

F, C, G are the approved floors, ceilings, and liveness slices. Some review-level constraints are derived: they are checked only after A UTO CEDAR compiles them into primitive verifier obligations. The model proposes candidates Pt from repair packets mt, while the Cedar checker validates Pt and runs cedar symcc to produce check records Qt against the fixed plan. The signal layer Φ turns failed records into the next repair packet; passing records produce an evidence package whose trace T records source spans, atoms, boundaries, checks, and associated candidate clauses. 

packets. A reviewer accepts only atoms that match the intended behavior; approved schema atoms compile into a schema Σ,and approved property atoms compile into a boundary plan 

Π. Only then does candidate-policy search begin: the model proposes policy bundle Pt, the verifier produces check records 

Qt, and the signal layer turns failed records into the next repair packet mt+1 . Success is a Cedar file plus evidence that it satisfies the fixed target. AUTO CEDAR does not prompt over D as one undiffer-entiated blob. Instead, it uses GD : stable source nodes and bounded context packets that keep each proposal tied to a local, auditable slice of the requirements. Schema atoms say what exists in the authorization world: users, documents, roles, actions, attributes, and context fields. Property atoms say what behavior should hold over that world: which requests must be allowed, which requests must not leak through, which workflow classes must remain possible, and which constraints should compile into verifier checks. The human review step decides whether those atoms capture the intended behavior. The target is not fixed after the first pass of review. During target construction, A UTO CEDAR may discover that a property atom needs schema support the current schema does not provide, that a current property should be rejected or repaired, that a prior property now conflicts with the emerging target, or that an approved source node still lacks coverage. These repairs happen before candidate-policy search. The fixed target begins only after schema repair, property repair, coverage accounting, and admission checks have produced an approved Cedar schema Σ and boundary plan Π. The LLM then has a narrower job: propose a candidate Cedar policy Pt under that fixed target. The verifier checks the candidate against the entire plan. If the candidate is too broad, too narrow, syntactically invalid, or has made an approved workflow impossible, A U-

TO CEDAR sends the model a repair packet rather than a vague failure message. If every check passes, A UTO CEDAR returns 

(Σ , Π, P, T ), where Σ is the Cedar schema, Π is the approved boundary plan, P is the synthesized policy bundle, and T

Algorithm 1 AUTO CEDAR synthesis workflow 

Require: Access-control requirements D; iteration budget K

Ensure: Verified evidence package (Σ , Π, P, T ) or a reportable failure 1: Index D into source DAG GD with source nodes and bounded context packets 2: Propose and review schema atoms from source packets 3: Propose property atoms one packet at a time with coverage tracking 4: while a property exposes missing schema support or target conflict do 

5: Repair schema or property atoms; rerun mechanical and intent review 6: end while 

7: Compile approved atoms into schema Σ and boundary plan Π

8: if Σ fails validation or admission checks reject Π then 

9: return target-admission failure with reviewer-facing diagnostics 10: end if 

11: H ← ∅ ; m ← summary of the fixed target 12: for t = 1 to K do 

13: Ask the model for a candidate policy Pt using repair packet m

14: if Pt does not parse or type-check under Σ then 

15: m ← local diagnostic repair packet for Pt

16: else 

17: Qt ← verifier records for checking Pt against Π

18: if all records in Qt pass then 

19: Record trace T with source spans, atoms, boundaries, records, and associated clauses 20: return (Σ , Π, P t, T )

21: end if 

22: m ← Φ( Qt, P t, Π, H )

23: end if 

24: Append the candidate, diagnostics or verifier records, and m to H

25: end for 

26: return budget failure with target, history, and verifier records 

is the evidence trace recording source text, approved atoms, boundaries, verifier records, and candidate clauses associated with those records. 

B. Verification-Guided Search 

The verifier cannot check a candidate against the original prose. It needs a semantic target. In this setting, that tar-get is not a preexisting reference implementation, because writing the implementation is the problem. AUTO CEDAR 

instead builds a reviewed boundary of acceptable behavior. A boundary is necessary because two Cedar policies can express the same access-control behavior with different clauses, and two policies that look almost identical can permit different requests. A single golden policy would make the target too brittle. A boundary lets the verifier ask the question that matters: is the candidate inside the approved behavior and does it include the required behavior? Once a schema Σ fixes the typed request universe RΣ, every candidate policy bundle P denotes a set of permitted requests 

sem( P ) ⊆ RΣ. The primitive plan asks three questions about that set. What must be inside it? What must stay outside it? What workflow class must not be emptied? A UTO CEDAR 

represents those answers as a boundary plan Π = ( C, F, G)

where C is a set of ceiling policies, F is a set of floor policies, and G is a set of reviewed liveness slices. Each ceiling 

Ci says that a candidate must not permit requests outside 

sem( Ci). Each floor Fj says that a candidate must at least include sem( Fj ). Each liveness slice Gk ⊆ RΣ says that an approved request class cannot disappear. The third case matters because a policy that denies everything can satisfy many safety constraints while still being useless. Beyond the primitive plan, A UTO CEDAR also accepts au-thoring conveniences (such as disjointness and rate-limit-style intent) that it grounds, reviews, and compiles into checks or patches over Π when their meaning is expressible in it. They extend what the author can state rather than what the plan represents. Disjointness is especially important for global policy stores: it can patch same-action floors so that one approved workflow does not accidentally permit a mutually exclusive one. Rate-limit-style atoms are governed by the same discipline: they contribute only through the finite, verifier-facing obligations that A UTO CEDAR can compile from the reviewed atom, not through a claim about runtime enforcement outside Cedar’s policy semantics. 

Definition 1 (Plan satisfaction) . For a permit set S ⊆ RΣ,write S |= Π iff 

∀Ci ∈ C . S ⊆ sem( Ci),

∀Fj ∈ F . sem( Fj ) ⊆ S, 

∀Gk ∈ G . S ∩ Gk̸ = ∅.

A candidate policy bundle P satisfies Π, written P |= Π , iff 

sem( P ) |= Π .

Definition 1 is the point where the prose target becomes something the verifier can own: a candidate is too permissive when it escapes a ceiling, too restrictive when it misses a floor, and has lost an approved workflow when it fails to intersect a liveness slice. These are not different phrasings of the same error; they are different semantic failures. 

The admissible interval. The candidate policy must exist between these two bounds: it must be permissive enough to include all floors and restrictive enough not to exceed any ceiling. Let 

UΠ = \

> Ci∈C

sem( Ci), LΠ = [ 

> Fj∈F

sem( Fj ),

with the usual conventions that an empty ceiling intersection is RΣ and an empty floor union is ∅.                 

> RΣrequests
> UΠceiling maximum approved access
> candidate
> sem( Pt)
> LΠfloor required access
> Gk
> live workflow
> TIGHTEN
> LOOSEN EXPAND
> Fig. 2. The synthesis sandwich. The dashed rectangle is an intermediate candidate: it must stay inside the ceiling envelope, grow to include required access, and hit each live workflow slice. Final acceptance requires LΠ⊆
> sem( P)⊆UΠand sem( P)∩Gk̸=∅. The same verifier call therefore induces different repair directions: a request outside the ceiling tightens, a missing floor loosens, and an empty liveness slice expands.

Theorem 1 (Synthesis sandwich) . A candidate policy bundle 

P satisfies Π iff 

LΠ ⊆ sem( P ) ⊆ UΠ and ∀Gk ∈ G . sem( P ) ∩ Gk̸ = ∅.

Proof. The floor clauses of Definition 1 are equivalent to S  

> Fj∈F

sem( Fj ) ⊆ sem( P ), which is LΠ ⊆ sem( P ). The ceiling clauses are equivalent to sem( P ) ⊆ T 

> Ci∈C

sem( Ci),which is sem( P ) ⊆ UΠ. The liveness clauses are unchanged by the definition of LΠ and UΠ. Combining the three equiva-lences gives the result. The theorem says exactly what the verifier certifies at the end of a run: the final policy is no smaller than the approved floors, no larger than the approved ceilings, and not empty on any approved liveness slice. Floors and ceilings form the sandwich in Fig. 2. Liveness prevents the sandwich from being satisfied by a policy that silently drops a required workflow. 

Plan compatibility. Some targets are broken before the first LLM call. A reviewer may approve a floor that a ceiling forbids, or a liveness slice that lies entirely outside the upper bound. In those cases the problem is not that the model needs a better prompt. The target itself must be repaired. At the set level, the ideal compatibility condition is simple: 

LΠ ⊆ UΠ and ∀Gk ∈ G . U Π ∩ Gk̸ = ∅.

The first clause says the required requests fit inside the approved upper bound; the second says every approved live-ness slice is reachable somewhere inside that bound. This condition abstracts away Cedar syntax, so it should not be read as an implementation claim that A UTO CEDAR solves a complete global feasibility problem. The current system uses verifier-backed admission checks: schema validation, boundary validation, pairwise floor-versus-ceiling checks after derived-constraint compilation, identity-consistency checks, and liveness and probe checks. These are target-admission checks, not repair packets. They use some of the same verifier machinery that the signal layer later uses, but they run before search and decide whether the target is coherent enough to give to the model at all. If they fail, A UTO CEDAR reports a target-construction problem to the reviewer instead of asking the LLM to synthesize around an impossible plan. 

Proposition 1 (Conditional soundness) . If AUTO CEDAR re-turns a policy bundle P for an approved plan Π, then the returned artifact has passed Cedar validation, and cedar symcc has certified the inclusion checks in Theorem 1 and the implemented liveness checks in Π. Consequently, the returned policy is semantically valid with respect to the approved boundary plan: it stays within all ceilings, includes all floors, and passes the approved liveness checks. Validity with respect to organizational intent holds only under the explicit assump-tion that the human-approved plan accurately captures that intent. AUTO CEDAR makes no stronger claim. A compatible plan may still lack a concise Cedar implementation, or the model may fail to find one within budget. C. Intent Construction and Review 

A verifier can say that P |= Π , but it cannot say whether 

Π was the right plan. That judgment belongs before search, because once the plan is approved every later guarantee is relative to it. A UTO CEDAR therefore makes human re-view attach to behavior rather than to final Cedar syntax. During target construction, each atom is proposed from a bounded source packet and carries source-node attribution. AUTO CEDAR formalizes each reviewable unit as an atom 

a = ( s, k, u, z, σ sym , σ intent ), where s is the source span or source-node set, k is the atom kind, u is the plain-English rendering shown to the reviewer, z is the Cedar artifact or schema edit, σsym is the mechanical status, and σintent is the review status. An atom enters the approved atom set iff 

σsym (a) = pass and σintent (a) = accept . σsym says z is well formed under Cedar syntax, typing, and boundary-admission checks. σintent says that the reviewer accepts u as the intended interpretation of the source span. Neither status implies the other, and only approved atoms contribute to Σ or Π.The split between schema atoms and property atoms is not bookkeeping. A schema atom decides what concepts exist in the policy world: entity types, actions, attributes, relationships, and context fields. It authorizes no request by itself. A property atom decides behavior over that vocabulary: a floor, a ceiling, a liveness slice, or a derived constraint such as disjointness that compiles into verifier-facing checks. A correct-looking boundary over the wrong vocabulary is still wrong, and a good vocabulary can still support a boundary that is too broad, too narrow, or missing a required workflow. This is why target construction can backtrack. A property atom may require schema hooks that do not exist yet, such as a relationship field, status flag, or context attribute. A U-

> TO

CEDAR does not show that unsatisfiable property to the reviewer as if it were ready. It records the missing support, repairs the schema candidate, and reruns the mechanical and intent checks before the property can enter the plan. The target becomes fixed only after this repair loop and coverage accounting finish. Reviewers are not asked to certify an unchecked generated policy. They approve the target that the verifier will later enforce. When two admissible Cedar encodings of the same intent behave differently, A UTO CEDAR can present the differ-ence as a request rather than as a Cedar diff: for example, whether a role-scoped user may read a sensitive field under a particular context. The reviewer chooses behavior, and the chosen behavior becomes part of Π.After synthesis, the trace T records source spans, approved atoms, boundary policies, verifier records, and the candidate clauses associated with those records. It is an audit aid, not a proof of clause provenance. It lets a reviewer ask why a clause was included and which approved boundary it helped satisfy, while the semantic guarantee still comes from the verifier. Benchmark runs may use simulated review as a measurement instrument, but those runs do not create intent authority. The correctness claim rests on human-approved targets. 

D. Signal-Layer 

The first failed candidate is where verifier-guided synthesis is most prone to misdirection. The verifier can be completely precise and still not tell the model what to do next. A failed check might mean that the target itself is broken, that the candidate is too broad, that it is too narrow, that it cannot type-check, that a reviewed workflow has disappeared, or that the model is cycling through the same bad repair. If A UTO CEDAR 

sends these outcomes back as one generic rejection, the model can move in exactly the wrong direction: loosen a ceiling failure, tighten a floor failure, or remove the workflow the reviewer wanted preserved. The signal layer is the translation boundary that prevents this collapse. It does not make the verifier stronger. It makes verifier evidence usable without letting that evidence rewrite the reviewed target. A signal record is a typed object q =(ℓ, o, τ, κ, w, e ), where ℓ says which layer produced the record, 

o names the oracle or check, τ records the boundary or diagnostic kind, κ records the relation being tested, w is any witness or counterexample, and e is localization evidence such as a candidate/reference excerpt, diff, or diagnosis. A UTO -CEDAR then computes Φ( Qt, P t, Π, H t) → mt+1 , from the current records Qt, failed candidate Pt, approved plan Π, and search history Ht. The output is the next repair packet. The packet may select, normalize, compress, and order evidence. It may not mutate Π, invent a witness, reverse polarity, or add an unapproved obligation. This typing is what keeps the current implementation from becoming a flat list of checks. Signals fall into four classes: target admission, semantic direction, local diagnostics, and history. Each has distinct obligations for what may and may not reach the model. Table I states these four obligations; Algorithm 2 gives the full translation. These are different uses of verifier evidence, not different excuses to change the oracle. O1 keeps malformed targets out of the search loop. An atom that never matches any request, a disjointness constraint whose compiled form is not actually disjoint, a floor that is outside a same-action ceiling, or an identity check that compares a staff TABLE I SIGNAL -LAYER OBLIGATIONS AND REPAIR INFORMATION PRESERVATION     

> Obligation Preserved signal and invariant O1: target well formed Target-admission records preserve schema validity, satisfiable atoms, never-errors, match vacuity/broadness, identity consistency, derived-constraint compilation, duplicate/equivalent atoms, and floor-ceiling consistency before search starts. O2: semantic direction Boundary kind, checked relation, witness, and action-local evidence preserve whether the candidate should TIGHTEN ,LOOSEN ,EXPAND , or repair a disjointness collapse. O3: local diagnostic repair Parse, validation, setup, runtime-safety, excerpt/diff, session-binding, membership-drift, union-ceiling, role-intersection, and global-constraint diagnostics keep local repairs local. O4: history and non-progress Candidate hashes, recurring failure sets, oscillation windows, and repeated action-local diffs surface non-progress without changing the oracle.

Algorithm 2 Signal-layer translation Φ                                                             

> Require: Check records Qt; candidate Pt; approved plan Π; history Ht
> Ensure: Repair packet mt+1
> 1: Select failed records and attach their layer ℓ, oracle o, kind τ, relation κ,witness w, and localization evidence e
> 2: if any target-admission record fails then
> 3: return target-construction diagnostic; do not ask model to repair Pt
> 4: end if
> 5: for all candidate-side semantic records qdo
> 6: if qis a ceiling or disjointness over-permission failure then
> 7: mark direction TIGHTEN
> 8: else if qis a floor failure then
> 9: mark direction LOOSEN
> 10: else if qis a liveness failure then
> 11: mark direction EXPAND
> 12: end if
> 13: attach only approved boundary text, witness w,and localization evidence e
> 14: end for
> 15: Convert parse, validation, setup, runtime-safety, and structural diagnostics into local repair hints 16: Compare Ptand failed records with Htto detect repetition, oscillation 17: return repair packet with selected boundaries, directions, witnesses, local hints, and history summary

user to a patient entity is not a hard synthesis problem. It is an invalid target. The right response is to send the reviewer or target construction step a precise diagnostic, not to ask the LLM to synthesize around an invalid target. O2 preserves direction. The same witness can require op-posite repairs depending on which boundary produced it. A request outside an approved ceiling is excess permission; a request inside an approved floor may be missing permission. Direction is therefore a function of the typed check record: 

Dt(q) = 



> TIGHTEN

, q.τ ∈ { ceiling , disjoint },

> LOOSEN

, q.τ = floor ,

> EXPAND

, q.τ = liveness ,

> LOCAL

, q.τ ∈ { parse , type , safety }.

The relation field q.κ still has to agree with the kind: an upper-bound failure tightens, a lower-bound failure loosens, and a nonempty failure expands. If the boundary and relation kind disagree, the record is malformed feedback and should not become a model instruction. O3 keeps local diagnostics local. A candidate that does not parse, does not validate, or can raise runtime Cedar errors has no meaningful permit-set denotation to compare against the synthesis sandwich. A UTO CEDAR may ask the model to fix the offending expression, declaration, optional-attribute guard, or clause under the same schema. It may also point to the candidate block that failed, show the reference block it was checked against, or explain a session-binding or set-membership encoding mismatch. None of those local repairs becomes a new floor, ceiling, or liveness requirement. O4 makes search history part of the repair state. A sin-gle verifier call cannot say whether search is improving, repeating, or oscillating. A UTO CEDAR records recurring failed boundaries, repeated candidates, and failures that trade off against each other across iterations. It can tell the model that it is cycling between a floor and a ceiling, or that a role-scoped forbid rule keeps removing access required by a floor. History changes the repair packet, not the oracle. This is how A UTO CEDAR remembers non-progress without letting the model rewrite the target. IV. C EDAR BENCH : A C EDAR BENCHMARK 

If the claim were only that an LLM can produce Cedar syn-tax, an ordinary natural-language-to-policy benchmark would be enough. AUTO CEDAR is making a different claim. It says that the hard part is holding a global semantic target fixed while verifier evidence guides a stochastic proposer. CedarBench exists to measure that interface. The current CedarBench repository contains 221 tasks. Seventy-nine are mutation tasks rooted in official Cedar exam-ple domains for GitHub-style repositories, document clouds, hotel chains, sales organizations, streaming services, tag-and-role systems, tax-preparation workflows, and clinical data access. The other 142 are hand-authored real-world tasks covering scoped tokens, delegation, revocation, time windows, break-glass access, role intersections, and large policy stores. Every task is executable: it has a prose specification, a Cedar schema, a Python verification plan, and Cedar reference poli-cies. The reference policies are not deployment answers. They are formal witnesses for the reviewed floors, ceilings, liveness probes, and related checks that define the target for that task. Each CedarBench task pairs a requirement with the objects AUTO CEDAR needs to make the requirement checkable: a vocabulary, reviewed semantic boundaries, and executable verifier checks. The unit of measurement is not whether a generated snippet looks plausible in isolation. It is whether a candidate policy store satisfies the whole reviewed target: floors are included, ceilings are not exceeded, liveness slices remain reachable, and the final artifact validates under the shared schema. This matters because independent translation hides failure mode we care about. A system can translate fifty fragments into fifty locally reasonable rules and still produce global trouble: one rule grants outside the intended scope, another relies on implicit exception, and a later rule makes an approved workflow unreachable. CedarBench therefore makes cross-policy interference visible: whether the policy store, taken as a whole, lands inside the approved authorization boundary. CedarBench should not be read as a production-policy distribution or as proof that every organizational intent has been captured perfectly. Its target is narrower and more useful for this paper: it gives A UTO CEDAR a replayable substrate for asking whether reviewed intent constraints, symbolic checks, and model-facing repair signals actually work together. V. E XPERIMENTS 

We consider the following research questions: 

RQ1 Synthesis effectiveness : To what extent can A UTO -CEDAR synthesize Cedar policies that satisfy formal verifi-cation targets, and at what computational cost? 

RQ2 Signal-layer contribution : How does verifier-to-model feedback contribute to A UTO CEDAR synthesis performance? 

RQ3 Verification validity : Does satisfying the verification plan produced by A UTO CEDAR reliably predict policy cor-rectness with respect to NL intent? 

RQ4 Baseline comparison : How does A UTO CEDAR policy quality compare to direct LLM-based policy generation? 

A. Experimental Setup 

Datasets. Our evaluation considers two datasets: the Cedar-Bench benchmark discussed in Section IV, and three natural-language access-control requirements corpora drawn from iTrust, CyberChair, and the IBM course registration system, following the ACRE/REDE access-control extraction line of work [9], [10]. The reported external-corpus scenarios use 401 IBM Course Management sentences, 303 CyberChair sen-tences, and 471 iTrust-for-Text2Policy sentences, from which access control sentences were extracted from. We use these access control sentences in our experiments, rather than the full natural language description of each system. Those corpora provide realistic natural-language and NLACP-style access-control material, but they do not provide Cedar schemas or policies. 

Metrics. We record the model configuration, iteration bud-get, number of checks, convergence status, final loss, wall-clock time, token usage, and estimated API cost. The current CedarBench driver runs the checked-in targets with a 20-iteration budget and checkpoints each scenario so long runs can be resumed. We report both GPT-5.5 low, a strong pro-poser, and Haiku 4.5, a cheaper and faster proposer, because the question is not only whether the loop works with the strongest model but whether verifier-guided repair still carries a smaller model. We use the Cedar CLI and cedar symcc 

with the cvc5 SMT solver [11]. Model cost is reported separately from local solver time and human review time. 

B. RQ1: Synthesis Effectiveness 

RQ1 asks the most direct question: once the target has been made executable, can A UTO CEDAR actually synthesize policies that satisfy it? On CedarBench, the answer is yes                                              

> TABLE II CEDAR BENCH SYNTHESIS EFFECTIVENESS FOR AUTO CEDAR ON ALL 221
> SCENARIOS . A LL REPORTED NUMBERS ARE AVERAGES .
> Model Convergence Iters Time Tokens Cost GPT-5.5 low 221/221, 100% 1.67 24.59s 9,084 $0.0405 Haiku 4.5 221/221, 100% 2.51 8.93s 12,397 $0.0185
> TABLE III SIGNAL -LAYER ABLATION ON A 100-SCENARIO CEDAR BENCH SLICE .LOSS IS THE MEAN FINAL VERIFIER -VIOLATION COUNT . M EAN ITER .
> AVERAGES SYNTHESIS ITERATIONS OVER COMPLETED SCENARIOS ,SO IT CAN BE FRACTIONAL . C OST IS TOTAL RUN COST .
> Mode Scen. Conv. Mean loss Mean iter. Cost Schema only 100 85 15.58 1.00 $1.42 Schema + atoms, one-shot 100 84 0.27 1.00 $1.62 Native verifier loop 100 94 0.10 2.37 $5.73 Full signal stack 100 100 0.00 2.20 $5.83

for both model configurations we tested. Table II reports per-scenario averages over all 221 CedarBench scenarios. Both models converge on every scenario. GPT-5.5 low takes fewer repair iterations and fewer tokens per scenario. Haiku 4.5 takes more iterations, but is faster and cheaper in this run. Thus we find that A UTO CEDAR can successfully synthesize Cedar policies that satisfy formal verification targets. 

C. RQ2: Signal-Layer Contribution 

The ablation asks how useful the Signal Layer contribution is inside of A UTO CEDAR . We use a fixed 100-scenario Cedar-Bench slice and hold fixed the model (GPT-5.5 low), selected scenarios, Cedar validator, schemas, verification plans, and reference policies. The schema-only condition is also not a raw natural-language-to-Cedar baseline: it receives the approved schema produced by A UTO CEDAR ’s schema-generation stage and must synthesize only the policy. We then compare four full-slice conditions: the model sees only that approved schema and prose, sees the schema plus property atoms in a one-shot setting, sees native verifier feedback in an iterative loop, or sees the full A UTO CEDAR repair-oriented signal stack. Table III shows why pass rate alone is misleading. Residual loss counts how many verifier violations remain at the end of a run, so it separates a near miss from a policy that is still far from the reviewed target. Schema-only and one-shot schema-plus-atoms converge on 85/100 and 84/100, but their residual losses differ sharply: 15.58 versus 0.27. The formal target pulls the model close even when the first candidate is not accepted. Native verifier feedback is also strong, converging on 94/100 with mean loss 0.10. The full signal stack closes the last six failures, reaching 100/100 with zero loss and similar cost. RQ2 therefore has a split answer: reviewed targets reduce the size of mistakes, and shaped repair signals close the stubborn remainder. 

D. RQ3 & RQ4: Policy Correctness and Baseline Comparison 

We note that to the best of our knowledge, A UTO CEDAR is the only tool that can synthesize Cedar policies and schemas from natural-language requirements against a formal verifica-tion target. A direct LLM baseline can generate policy text, TABLE IV VALIDATION PASS RATES . CATEGORY 1: NL ONLY ; MODEL GENERATES SCHEMA AND POLICY . CATEGORY 2: NL + A UTO CEDAR SCHEMA ;                           

> MODEL GENERATES POLICY ONLY .
> Setting Model CedarBench (221) Real-world (3) Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@1 Pass@3 Category 1 Haiku 4.5 0/221 0/221 0/3 0/3 Category 1 GPT-5.5 155/221 199/221 0/3 0/3 Category 2 Haiku 4.5 146/221 148/221 0/3 0/3 Category 2 GPT-5.5 196/221 204/221 0/3 0/3
> AUTO CEDAR :221/221 CedarBench; 3/3 real-world.

but without a reviewed boundary plan there is no formal notion of correctness to check against. To answer RQ3 and RQ4, we conduct three experiments which all study policy correctness and baseline comparison from different angles. We therefore organize around three evidence types: formal correctness, semantic correctness, and human alignment. We use two baseline categories throughout. In Category 1 , the model receives only the natural-language (NL) intent and must generate both the Cedar schema and policy. In Category 2 ,the model receives the same NL intent together with the schema produced by A UTO CEDAR and must generate only the Cedar policy. Category 2 puts all candidate policies under the same A UTO CEDAR schema and approved property atoms, so the policies can be checked against the same formal targets. Category 1 lets each model invent its own schema, so there is no common property target for comparing those outputs; we therefore report only validation for that category. 

1) Formal Correctness: We probe formal correctness at two levels. First, Validation uses cedar validate to check whether the generated Cedar artifacts are well-formed: the policy must parse, type-check, and conform to its schema. Sec-ond, Property checking uses cedar symcc to ask whether a validation-passing Category 2 policy satisfies the approved floor, ceiling, and liveness atoms for the same NL intent. We can run property checks in Category 2 only because the policy is written against the A UTO CEDAR schema, so the approved atoms and the candidate policy share the same vocabulary. For the real-world scenarios, when a generated Category 2 policy failed validation only because of trivial syntax or casing errors, we repaired those errors without changing the policy logic and then included it in property checking; policies requiring non-trivial modeling changes were left unevaluated. 

a) Validation: Table IV reports validation results for both input settings on CedarBench and the three real-world scenar-ios, with Pass@1 denoting the initial generation and Pass@3 denoting validation in at least one of three independent gener-ations. On CedarBench, Haiku 4.5 fails all Category 1 cases, while GPT-5.5 improves from 155/221 at Pass@1 to 199/221 at Pass@3. Supplying the A UTO CEDAR schema in Category 2 improves validation for both models, with GPT-5.5 reaching 204/221 at Pass@3. On the real-world scenarios, neither direct baseline validates in Category 1 or Category 2 across three attempts; the common failures are invalid Cedar syntax and schema-policy mismatches. A UTO CEDAR validates on all 221 CedarBench scenarios and all three real-world scenarios.            

> TABLE V CEDAR BENCH PROPERTY -CHECKING RESULTS FOR CATEGORY 2.
> Generator or method Full property pass Property-check pass rate GPT-5.5 79.6% (176/221) 88.1% (4397/4991) Haiku 4.5 1.4% (3/221) 72.6% (2758/3798) AUTO CEDAR 100.0% (221/221) 100.0% (all checks)
> Fig. 3. Error profile of validation-passing policies on CedarBench

b) Property checking: We run property checking only after the validation gate. On CedarBench, this means the validation-passing Category 2 policies: 148 Haiku-4.5 policies and 204 GPT-5.5 policies at Pass@3. On the real-world scenarios, this means the two GPT-5.5 Category 2 policies for IBM and CyberChair that could be made validation-passing with only trivial syntax or casing repairs. Table V reports CedarBench results. A UTO CEDAR satis-fies all approved properties for all 221 scenarios; GPT-5.5 fully passes 176/221 and Haiku 4.5 only 3/221. Individual property-check pass rates expose near misses: GPT-5.5 sat-isfies 4397/4991 checks and Haiku 4.5 satisfies 2758/3798. Table VI shows the same pattern on the real-world scenarios: AUTO CEDAR passes every property, while repaired GPT-5.5 policies pass 20/21 for IBM and 8/20 for CyberChair. Figure 3 plots ceiling violations against floor and live-ness violations for validation-passing Category 2 policies. AUTO CEDAR sits at the origin; GPT-5.5 has small scattered misses; Haiku 4.5 collapses toward over-permissive or over-restrictive/dead policies. Figure 4 shows the gap by domain: GPT-5.5 collapses on tags , streaming , and doccloud ,while Haiku 4.5 is near-zero throughout. 

2) Semantic Correctness: We evaluate semantic correctness using authorization requests. This experiment addresses RQ3 by checking whether policies make the expected authorization Fig. 4. Fully-correct rate (%) across CedarBench’s domains. Each cell is the percentage of that domain’s scenarios in which every property atom passes. TABLE VI REAL -WORLD PROPERTY AND SEMANTIC REQUEST RESULTS . B ASELINE ROWS ARE CATEGORY 2; “ REPAIR ” MEANS ONLY TRIVIAL SYNTAX OR CASING FIXES . N/A INDICATES INVALID SCHEMA /POLICY .                             

> Scenario Policy Properties passed Requests matched IBM GPT-5.5 (repair) 20/21 72/76 IBM Haiku 4.5 N/A N/A IBM AUTO CEDAR 21/21 76/76 CyberChair GPT-5.5 (repair) 8/20 58/68 CyberChair Haiku 4.5 N/A N/A CyberChair AUTO CEDAR 20/20 68/68 iTrust GPT-5.5 N/A N/A iTrust Haiku 4.5 N/A N/A iTrust AUTO CEDAR 35/35 38/38

decisions on concrete scenarios derived from the NL intent. For each real-world scenario, we constructed a semantic test set from the NL intent. First, each request was justified by one or more explicit access-control statements in the NL. Second, we instantiated a scenario-specific entity database containing the principals, resources, relationships, and state needed to make those requests executable. Third, we included only requests whose expected decision was determined by the NL intent itself. Each semantic request was translated into a Cedar request under the A UTO CEDAR schema. Table VI shows that A UTO CEDAR matches all semantic requests across the three real-world scenarios: 76/76 for IBM, 68/68 for CyberChair, and 38/38 for iTrust. The repaired GPT-5.5 baselines match 72/76 requests for IBM and 58/68 requests for CyberChair. Haiku 4.5 and the iTrust baselines are N/A because they did not pass Cedar validation. The request failures align with the property failures. In IBM, the failed requests exercise the same valid registration behavior captured by the failed floor property. In CyberChair, the failed requests exercise the same role-boundary mistakes exposed by the failed ceiling properties. Thus, the request-level failures provide concrete examples of the same policy weaknesses detected by property checking. 

3) Human Alignment: This experiment asks whether human readers prefer the policy artifacts produced by A UTO CEDAR 

or by direct LLM generation when they must answer con-crete access-control questions. We ran a blinded artifact-judgment study with 14 participants. Participants saw require-ment context, an access request, and Cedar excerpts from two anonymized systems. The A/B labels were randomized per probe. For each probe, participants selected which artifact better handled the request, or chose tie/neither, and could explain their judgment. The study produced 98 probe-level answers across two scenarios: iTrust credentials, sessions, and patient scope; and gradebook external-grade conflicts. Participants selected the AUTO CEDAR artifact in 82/98 answers (83.7%), the direct LLM baseline in 8/98 answers (8.2%), and tie/neither in 8/98 answers (8.2%). The preference was strongest on iTrust, where AUTO CEDAR was selected in 52/56 answers (92.9%). Grade-book was more ambiguous but still favored A UTO CEDAR :30/42 answers (71.4%) selected the A UTO CEDAR artifact. The qualitative explanations match the technical failure modes above. Participants preferred artifacts that made the relevant boundary explicit: sensitive credential fields, session state, represented-patient scope, grade kind, and role-conflict forbids. They criticized baseline artifacts when they used broad permits or lacked the schema fields needed to enforce the intended boundary. This study is not a proof of policy correctness, and it does not yet evaluate the live HITL work-flow; optional HITL feedback was sparse. It does show that, under concrete review questions, readers more often judged the AUTO CEDAR -derived artifact as the one that better matched access-control intent. 

4) Answering RQ3+RQ4: Taken together, the formal prop-erty checks, semantic request tests, and blinded artifact-judgment study provide complementary evidence for RQ3 and RQ4. For RQ3, the results show that A UTO CEDAR ’s verification plan is a useful predictor of NL-level correct-ness: policies satisfying the approved atoms also match all semantic requests in the real-world scenarios, while failed atoms correspond to concrete request-level errors. For RQ4, direct LLM generation improves when given the A UTO CEDAR 

schema, but schema guidance alone is insufficient: validation-passing GPT-5.5 and Haiku 4.5 policies still violate floor or ceiling properties and fail request tests. A UTO CEDAR performs better because it does not stop at producing syntactically valid Cedar; it synthesizes against explicit, reviewed correctness targets and uses verifier feedback to close the gap between NL intent and executable policy. Thus, the combined evidence supports both the validity of the verification targets and the advantage of verifier-guided synthesis over direct LLM policy generation. 

VI. T HREATS TO VALIDITY 

Target validity. AUTO CEDAR certifies a policy against the reviewed Cedar schema and verification target, not against organizational truth in the abstract. If a requirement is missing from the source material, or if a reviewer approves the wrong atom, the verifier will faithfully check the wrong boundary. In our experiments, the CedarBench plans are benchmark artifacts and the external-corpus plans were constructed for this study; they should be read as reviewed semantic targets for evaluation, not as independently audited production policies. 

Request coverage. Symbolic checks are the primary ac-ceptance criterion, but request-level evaluation is still only a sample of concrete behavior. Generated requests can miss corner cases, especially in domains with large entity graphs, temporal conditions, or context-dependent workflow state. We therefore use request tests as a sanity check on policy behavior, not as a replacement for the floor, ceiling, liveness, and disjointness obligations. 

Model and reviewer effects. LLM outputs are nondeter-ministic, and direct-generation baselines are especially sensi-tive to retries; this is why we report retry-based validation results rather than a single sample. The HITL parts of the evaluation also depend on the reviewer population and review procedure. A small or author-driven review study can show whether the artifacts are inspectable, but it cannot by itself prove how production engineers would review the same targets under deployment pressure. VII. R ELATED WORK 

CEGIS when the proposer is stochastic. Counterexample-guided inductive synthesis pairs generation with a verifier that rejects bad candidates [12], [13]. In classical settings, the generator is often symbolic or enumerative, so earlier counterexamples can be removed from the search space by construction. An LLM breaks that assumption. It can read counterexamples and try again, but it does not maintain a symbolic version space and can reintroduce an old failure in the next sample. Recent LLM systems still use this verifier-in-the-loop pattern for repair, execution-guided debugging, formal proofs, and planning [14]–[18]. A UTO CEDAR keeps the useful discipline of CEGIS–every accepted candidate is checked against the full target–while making explicit what the LLM does not provide: monotone elimination of prior failures. 

Verifier-guided formalization. Formal mathematics sys-tems show how much an LLM can gain from a mechan-ically checked environment: language-model provers have been paired with automated theorem provers, interactive proof environments, retrieval over verified libraries, proof repair, and proof-assistant feedback during search or training [15], [16], [19]–[21]. LEAP [18] combines informal proof sketches, Lean compiler feedback, and a graph that records proof decompo-sition and memoizes verified subgoals. Roundtrip verification work makes the neighboring point for autoformalization: the formal tool can expose semantic drift and support scoped repair [22]. A UTO CEDAR starts from organizational intent and must first construct the object to be checked: a reviewed schema, boundary plan, and audit trace that records how source spans, approved atoms, verifier records, and candidate clauses were associated. 

LLM policy authoring. Prior work asks whether LLMs can synthesize access-control policies from examples, request specifications, or natural language [4], and whether they can summarize or reconstruct existing policies at scale [5]. Those studies expose the failure mode that motivates this paper: syntax and plausibility are easier than semantic equivalence to the intended request set. A UTO CEDAR therefore moves the question from “can the model write a policy?” to “can it search under a reviewed target checked by a verifier?” 

Symbolic analysis as oracle, not repair. Policy analyzers such as Zelkova use SMT solving to reason about cloud poli-cies [8], and related systems quantify or repair permissiveness in access-control policies [23], [24]. These tools can produce the semantic facts we need: inclusion results, equivalence results, and witnesses. A stochastic proposer needs something different from the raw oracle output. It needs to know whether a witness means excess permission, missing permission, or a vanished workflow. A UTO CEDAR focuses on that missing interface between symbolic policy evidence and model-facing repair. VIII. C ONCLUSION 

An LLM that writes a plausible policy has not earned au-thority over access control. A UTO CEDAR assigns it a narrower role: propose candidates after a reviewed target has been fixed, and let a verifier judge every proposal against that target. Floor policies state what access must remain possible, ceiling policies state what access must not leak, and liveness slices keep approved workflows from disappearing. The paper’s main claim is that the hard interface is not only between natural-language and Cedar. It is also between a symbolic checker and a stochastic proposer. A verifier can return an exact failure, but a model needs a repair instruction that preserves boundary identity, witness request, repair direc-tion, provenance, and search history. The signal layer is that contract. It lets the model use verifier evidence without letting the model change the oracle. The resulting guarantee is intentionally narrow. A returned policy is certified by cedar symcc against the approved boundary plan; the plan’s correspondence to organizational intent remains a human-review judgment. That separation is the point. Verifier-guided LLM systems for security-sensitive synthesis should expose the target, the intent boundary, and the verifier-to-model signal as auditable state rather than hiding them inside prompts. REFERENCES [1] OWASP Foundation, “A01 Broken Access Control – OWASP Top 10:2025,” OWASP Top 10:2025, 2025, accessed: 2026-06-28. [2] SonarSource, “Sonar Data Reveals Critical “Verification Gap” in AI Coding,” SonarSource press release, 2026, accessed: 2026-06-28. [3] Anthropic, “Project Glasswing: An Initial Update,” Anthropic research update, 2026, accessed: 2026-06-28. [4] A. Vatsa, P. Patel, and W. Eiers, “Synthesizing access control policies using large language models,” in Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Natural Language-Based Software Engineering , 2025, arXiv:2503.11573. [5] A. Vatsa, B. Hall, and W. Eiers, “Exploring large language models for access control policy synthesis and summarization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20692 , 2025. [6] J. W. Cutler, C. Disselkoen, A. Eline, S. He, K. Headley, M. Hicks, K. Hietala, E. Ioannidis, J. Kastner, A. Mamat, D. McAdams, M. Mc-Cutchen, N. Rungta, E. Torlak, and A. M. Wells, “Cedar: A new lan-guage for expressive, fast, safe, and analyzable authorization (extended version),” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04651 , 2024. [7] “Cedar policy language,” cedarpolicy.com, accessed: 2026-06-24. [8] J. Backes, P. Bolignano, B. Cook, C. Dodge, A. Gacek, K. Luckow, N. Rungta, O. Tkachu, and C. Varming, “Semantic-based automated reasoning for AWS access policies using SMT,” in Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design , 2018, pp. 1–9. [9] J. Slankas and L. Williams, “Access control policy extraction from unconstrained natural language text,” in Proceedings of the 2013 Inter-national Conference on Social Computing . IEEE, 2013, pp. 435–440. [10] J. Slankas, X. Xiao, L. Williams, and T. Xie, “Relation extraction for inferring access control rules from natural language artifacts,” in Pro-ceedings of the 30th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference .ACM, 2014, pp. 366–375. [11] H. Barbosa, C. W. Barrett, M. Brain, G. Kremer, H. Lachnitt, M. Mann, A. Mohamed, M. Mohamed, A. Niemetz, A. N¨ otzli, A. Ozdemir, M. Preiner, A. Reynolds, Y. Sheng, C. Tinelli, and Y. Zohar, “cvc5: A versatile and industrial-strength SMT solver,” in Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13243. Springer, 2022, pp. 415–442. [12] A. Solar-Lezama, “Program synthesis by sketching,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, December 2008. [Online]. Available: https://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/ 2008/EECS-2008-177.html [13] A. Abate, C. David, P. Kesseli, D. Kroening, and E. Polgreen, “Coun-terexample guided inductive synthesis modulo theories,” in Computer Aided Verification . Springer, 2018, pp. 270–288. [14] S. Polu and I. Sutskever, “Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393 , 2020. [15] A. Q. Jiang, S. Welleck, J. P. Zhou, T. Lacroix, J. Liu, W. Li, M. Jamnik, G. Lample, and Y. Wu, “Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with informal proofs,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [16] E. First, M. N. Rabe, T. Ringer, and Y. Brun, “Baldur: Whole-proof generation and repair with large language models,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2023, pp. 1229–1241. [17] S. Varambally, T. Voice, Y. Sun, Z. Chen, R. Yu, and K. Ye, “Hilbert: Recursively building formal proofs with informal reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22819 , 2025. [18] P.-N. Kung, L. Song, D. Hwang, J. Yoon, C.-L. Li, S. Severini, M. Olsak, E. Lockhart, Q. V. Le, B. Gokturk, T. Luong, T. Pfister, and N. Peng, “LEAP: Supercharging LLMs for formal mathematics with agentic frameworks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03303 , 2026. [19] A. Q. Jiang, W. Li, S. Tworkowski, K. Czechowski, T. Odrzyg´ o´ zd´ z, P. Miło´ s, Y. Wu, and M. Jamnik, “Thor: Wielding hammers to integrate language models and automated theorem provers,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.10893 [20] K. Yang, A. M. Swope, A. Gu, R. Chalamala, P. Song, S. Yu, S. Godil, R. Prenger, and A. Anandkumar, “LeanDojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented language models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15626 [21] H. Xin, Z. Z. Ren, J. Song, Z. Shao, W. Zhao, H. Wang, B. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Lu, Q. Du, W. Gao, Q. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Gou, Z. F. Wu, F. Luo, and C. Ruan, “DeepSeek-Prover-V1.5: Harnessing proof assistant feedback for reinforcement learning and monte-carlo tree search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08152 , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08152 [22] D. Amrollahi, J. Lopez, and C. Barrett, “Faithful autoformalization via roundtrip verification and repair,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.25031 ,2026. [23] W. Eiers, G. Sankaran, A. Li, E. O’Mahony, B. Prince, and T. Bultan, “Quantifying permissiveness of access control policies,” in Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 1805–1817. [24] W. Eiers, G. Sankaran, and T. Bultan, “Quantitative policy repair for access control on the cloud,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , 2023, pp. 564–575.