Title: Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.14624v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 00:30:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Sanidhya Vijayvargiya 1 Vijay Viswanathan 1 Graham Neubig 1

# Abstract 

Humans often specify tasks incompletely, so as-sistants must know when and how to ask clari-fying questions. However, effective clarification remains challenging in software engineering tasks as not all missing information is equally valuable, and questions must target information users can realistically provide. We study clarification in real software engineering tasks by quantifying which types of information most affect task success and which questions elicit useful responses from sim-ulated users. Using Shapley attribution and distri-butional comparisons, we identify two key prop-erties of effective clarification: task relevance (which information predicts success) and user an-swerability (what users can realistically provide). We operationalize these properties as multi-stage reinforcement learning rewards to train CLAR-ITI, an 8B-parameter clarification module, that matches GPT-5’s resolution rate on underspecified issues while generating 41% fewer questions. Our results suggest that grounding reward design in empirical analysis of information impact and user answerability improves clarification efficiency. 

# 1. Introduction 

Real-world user requests are frequently underspecified. De-spite rapid improvements, LLM-based agents remain brittle when user instructions are underspecified or ambiguous, leading to wasted computation or task failure. Recent em-pirical studies highlight ambiguity and missing information as dominant failure modes for agents (Zhang et al., 2024; Vijayvargiya et al., 2025), underscoring the need for systems that can detect uncertainty and proactively seek additional information. A growing body of work demonstrates that clarifica-

> 1

Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon Univer-sity, Pittsburgh, USA. Correspondence to: Sanidhya Vijayvargiya 

<sanidhyv@cs.cmu.edu >.0 1 2 3 4 5 6

> Number of Questions
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> Task Success (%)
> Low Burden
> High Performance
> High Burden
> High Performance
> Low Burden
> Low Performance
> High Burden
> Low Performance
> No clarification
> GPT-5 Nano
> GPT-5
> CLARITI (Ours)
> Fully Specified

Figure 1. Our trained clarification model, CLARITI, achieves GPT-5-level performance (36.80%) with 41% fewer average questions (3.0 vs 5.1) by prioritizing task relevance and user answerability, demonstrating effective clarification at low user burden. 

tion questions can substantially improve downstream out-comes (Zhang & Choi, 2025; Chen et al., 2025), motivating recent work on user modeling that personalizes questions to individuals (Sun et al., 2025), or infers mental states (Zhou et al., 2025). We take a complementary, model-centric per-spective: given typical user knowledge boundaries, how should models optimize clarification to maximize task suc-cess? Prior work provides limited understanding of which missing information is most valuable or how agents should prioritize clarification under interaction constraints. The analyses pri-marily target linguistic ambiguity—often involving a single point of intent-level uncertainty (e.g., resolving a referent or disambiguating an intent)—which does not capture the broader underspecification found in task-oriented settings where multiple types of information may be missing with varying importance (Madge et al., 2025). As a result, de-spite evidence that clarification helps, we lack a principled understanding of what information to ask about, whether users can answer the questions posed, and how these factors impact task success. We study clarification in software engineering (SWE), a domain where tasks require precise specifications and ob-jective success can be measured via test suites. SWE issues 1

> arXiv:2604.14624v1 [cs.SE] 16 Apr 2026 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks

often omit critical details such as environment configuration, expected behavior, or implementation constraints. An effec-tive agent must prioritize among many possible information needs and identify which gaps genuinely block progress. We consider a controlled, single-turn setting where the agent poses clarifying questions to a simulated user before begin-ning implementation. Using separate modules for clarifica-tion generation and task execution, we isolate clarification quality from agent problem-solving capabilities allowing us to evaluate clarification independent of code-generation ability. This design exposes two fundamental dimensions: effective clarifications must target information likely to im-prove task success ( task relevance ) while remaining answer-able by typical users given their knowledge about the issues they report. We demonstrate that the identified qualities for effective clarification are learnable and predictive of down-stream success by training a clarification module, CLARITI (CLARIficiation with TIered rewards) 1, guided by these qualities that improves downstream agent performance (Fig-ure 1). We first characterize the information needs common to un-derspecified SWE tasks, then investigate three research ques-tions. Concretely, our contributions are: • RQ1: What information most impacts task success? 

We quantify the association between information cate-gory availability and downstream agent performance through Shapley value analysis across 700 underspec-ified SWE instances. Error information exhibits the strongest association, followed by implementation de-tails and environment configurations, revealing a hierar-chy where concrete diagnostic information contributes more to agent performance than abstract goal specifi-cations. • RQ2: What makes questions answerable? We in-vestigate characteristics that distinguish answerable from unanswerable clarification questions through dis-tributional analysis of the two classes. We identify that answerable questions tend to ground in observ-able behaviors, maintain appropriate technical depth, and avoid requesting internal state users would not know. Analyzing clarification composition, we find that performance often plateaus or declines with more questions while imposing higher user burden. Excess questions can waste user effort without improving out-comes, and any informational gains from additional questions are offset by the introduction of irrelevant or unusable information into the context. • RQ3: Training with empirically-grounded rewards. 

We design a multi-stage reward pipeline targeting both  

> 1Code and data can be accessed at https://github.com/ sani903/Teaching-Effective-Clarification

task relevance (from RQ1’s impact hierarchy) and an-swerability (from RQ2’s distributional analysis), plus auxiliary criteria of non-redundancy and diversity. Our trained 8B-parameter module matches GPT-5’s perfor-mance on our task (88% of fully specified upper bound) while generating 41% fewer questions, demonstrating that effective clarification can be learned through prin-cipled, empirically-grounded reward design. Our study connects clarification quality directly to empirical task-solving outcomes, providing a methodology for identi-fying what information matters, understanding what makes questions answerable, and training models to optimize both dimensions. While our work focuses on software engineer-ing, the framework combines empirical impact analysis, answerability characterization, and reward-driven training that can generalize to domains where agents rely on user-provided specifications. 

# 2. Information Categorization 

Effective clarification requires understanding what infor-mation agents lack. While prior work studies linguistic ambiguity (e.g., referential or syntactic ambiguity), it does not categorize the types of missing information that affect agent-based task resolution. We address this gap by an-alyzing underspecified issues in SWE-Bench. We define an information need as information absent from the issue description that is required for an agent to produce a correct patch without relying on unverifiable assumptions. 

2.1. Categories of Information Needs 

We derive our categorization from naturally occurring un-derspecification in software engineering tasks. We begin with the expert annotations of SWE-Bench issues which were used to construct the Verified subset (Chowdhury et al., 2024). The experts score each issue’s underspecifica-tion level (0–3 scale), with higher scores corresponding to greater underspecification. We extract 112 issues with high underspecification (score ≥ 2), where annotators provide detailed justifications for their ratings. These justifications describe specific information gaps that prevent resolution, such as missing error messages, unclear expected outputs, or absent reproduction steps. Issues often contain multiple information gaps. The codebook was developed by two authors through an iter-ative process. The authors independently coded the first 30 issues and then compared category assignments, resolving minor differences through discussion. This was followed by annotation of the remaining issues in batches following qualitative research principles (MacQueen et al., 1998). To assess completeness, we applied the codebook to 50 held-out issues and found no additional categories were required. 2Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks                    

> Table 1. We identify six categories of information needs from 112 underspecified SWE-Bench Verified annotations, ranging in frequency from occurring in as many as 65% of issues to only 3% of issues.
> Category Frequency Core Question Example Missing Information Error Information 65% What specific failure is occur-ring? Missing stack trace showing where code crashes; absent error message revealing constraint violation; unclear description of incorrect output format.
> Expected Behavior 33% What behavior should occur instead? Missing specification of correct return value; absent description of intended output format; unstated de-sired system state after operation completes.
> Implementation Details 37% What approach or constraints should guide the implementa-tion? Missing step-by-step guidance on achieving ex-pected behavior; lack of exact functions to modify and how they should be modified; unclear whether to change existing logic or implement from scratch.
> External References 15% What external context is needed to understand require-ments? Inaccessible API documentation link; missing ref-erence to upstream library behavior; absent dataset schema or format specification.
> Reproduction Steps 12% Under what conditions does the issue manifest? Missing command-line invocation that triggers the bug; absent minimal code example demonstrating the failure; unclear input that produces incorrect behavior.
> Version/Environment 3% What configuration details af-fect the issue? Missing dependency version that exhibits the bug; absent OS or Python version; unclear configuration flags or environment variables.

The resulting categorization comprises six categories of information needs, shown in Table 1. Each category rep-resents a distinct type of missing information that agents may need to obtain through clarification. Note that expert involvement is limited to this one-time codebook devel-opment over a limited number of samples; all subsequent per-instance category annotation can be fully automated via LLM judges, making the framework scalable. We report the frequency with which each category appears in the 112 highly underspecified issues. 

# 3. Experimental Setup 

We describe the datasets, agent framework, and evaluation methodology used throughout this work. All subsequent experiments (RQ1–RQ3) build on this shared infrastructure. 

3.1. Categorization-Grounded Evaluation Dataset 

We construct controlled underspecification variants of SWE-Bench Verified issues to enable systematic measurement of information impact. Starting from 500 issues, we first annotate which information categories appear in each issue description using the codebook introduced in Section 2.1. Annotation is performed with GPT-5 (Singh et al., 2025) using structured prompts that apply the codebook definitions (prompt details in Appendix A.2). For each issue, we then generate three underspecified rewrites by removing subsets of the annotated categories. Specifically, we randomly select subsets of categories present in the original issue and instruct GPT-5 to produce natural-language rewrites that omit those categories while preserving the remaining information. Each issue there-fore yields three distinct underspecified variants reflecting different omission patterns. We manually validate 50 randomly sampled rewrites to ver-ify that they (1) omit the intended categories, (2) preserve information from non-target categories, and (3) remain plau-sible GitHub issue descriptions. A detailed example of the annotation and rewrite process is provided in Appendix A.3. The full generation process yields 1,500 underspecified is-sue variants (500 issues × 3 rewrites). For impact analysis (RQ1), we evaluate a random sample of 700 instances drawn from this pool, ensuring coverage across different combina-tions of missing information types and varying numbers of hidden categories (1–3). For RQ2 and RQ3, we select one rewrite per SWE-Bench Verified issue to construct a dataset of 500 categorization-grounded underspecified issues used for clarification experiments. 

3.2. Agent Framework and Evaluation Protocol Agent environment. We use the OpenHands frame-work (Wang et al., 2024) with Seed OSS 36B In-struct (ByteDance Seed Team, 2025) as the agent backbone. We select Seed OSS 36B because it represents a strong open-weight coding model at the time of our experiments, 3Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 

> Mean Absolute SHAP Value
> External References
> Expected Behavior
> Reproduction Steps
> Version/Environment
> Implementation Details
> Error Information
> 0.0355
> 0.0572
> 0.0759
> 0.0884
> 0.0982
> 0.1830
> High importance
> Low importance

Figure 2. Mean absolute SHAP values with 95% bootstrap confi-dence intervals measuring the association between each informa-tion category and task success. 

enabling reproducible evaluation without reliance on propri-etary APIs. OpenHands provides a sandboxed environment in which agents can edit files, execute bash and Python commands, and iteratively refine solutions. Agents are con-figured with a maximum of 30 interaction iterations and a decoding temperature of 0.3. The agent backbone and configuration remain fixed across all experiments to isolate the impact of clarification strategies. 

Evaluation protocol. For each evaluation instance, we measure binary task success based on whether the patch produced by the agent passes all repository test cases after application. This metric provides an objective measure of downstream task completion. In RQ1, agents receive the underspecified issue descriptions directly without clarification to measure the baseline impact of missing information. In RQ2 and RQ3, we introduce clarification modules that allow the agent to ask questions before beginning implementation. Questions are answered by a simulated user implemented with GPT-5, which has access to the fully specified version of the issue similar to Vijayvargiya et al. (2025). The answers are then provided to the agent as additional context prior to code generation. 

# 4. RQ1: Impact of Information Categories on Task Success 

Having categorized the types of missing information, we next examine how these categories relate to agent task suc-cess. Specifically, we ask: which categories of missing information are most associated with successful task resolu-tion? To estimate the predictive contribution of each category, we perform Shapley value analysis (Lundberg & Lee, 2017). For each of the 700 evaluation instances, we represent the available information as a binary feature vector indicating whether each category is present (i.e., not hidden). We train predictive models that map these feature vectors to binary task success and compute SHAP values to estimate the marginal contribution of each category while accounting for interactions among features (details in Appendix A.4). We report bootstrap confidence intervals computed from 10,000 resamples to characterize uncertainty in the estimates. Before analyzing individual categories, we first measure the overall effect of underspecification. Converting issues from fully specified to underspecified variants reduces agent performance from 43.8% to 23.7% success across the 700 evaluated instances, confirming that missing information substantially reduces task success. Figure 2 reports the SHAP attribution results. Error Infor-mation has the highest mean SHAP value (0.183), followed by Implementation Details (0.0982). Expected Behavior 

(0.0572) and External References (0.0355) show lower mean contributions. Bootstrap confidence intervals overlap across categories, reflecting the limited sample size; we therefore interpret the ordering as an indicative trend rather than a statistically significant ranking. Despite this uncertainty, the relative ordering differs from the frequency with which categories are missing in nat-urally occurring underspecified issues (Table 1). For ex-ample, Expected Behavior is the most frequently missing category (65% of issues) yet shows only moderate associ-ation with task success. Conversely, Error Information is absent in 33% of underspecified issues but has the highest mean SHAP value. One possible explanation is that con-crete failure signals such as stack traces or error messages provide localized diagnostic information (e.g., file paths or failure points) that may help agents narrow the search space when debugging. 

Implementation Details follows a similar pattern: although missing in 37% of underspecified issues, it has relatively high predictive contribution, suggesting that explicit guid-ance on how a fix should be implemented may reduce am-biguity during solution search. An interesting case is Ver-sion/Environment , which is missing in only 3% of issues yet shows a comparatively high mean SHAP value, indicating that when such details are absent they may disproportion-ately affect task outcomes. Overall, these results suggest that the information most fre-quently omitted in issue descriptions does not necessarily align with the information most strongly associated with agent success. Categories providing concrete diagnostic signals or implementation guidance tend to show higher predictive contribution than categories describing expected outcomes or external context. This impact hierarchy moti-vates the impact-weighted reward signals used to train our clarification model in RQ3. 4Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

# 5. RQ2: User-Answerable Clarification Questions 

RQ1 identified which categories of missing information most strongly influence task success. We now examine a complementary dimension of clarification quality: answer-ability . Even when a question targets high-impact informa-tion, it provides little practical value if users cannot supply the requested information. This introduces a practical ten-sion in question formulation. Highly generic questions (e.g., 

Can you provide more details? ) are easy for users to answer but provide limited guidance, while overly technical ques-tions (e.g., What is the internal state of the cache manager? )may target useful information that typical users cannot rea-sonably provide. Rather than modeling individual user expertise, we analyze structural characteristics that distinguish questions that users can plausibly answer from those that request information beyond typical user knowledge. Specifically, we study distri-butional differences between answerable and unanswerable clarification questions and investigate how the composition of clarification sets affects downstream task success. 

5.1. Experimental Setup 

We use the same 500 underspecified issues from the taxonomy-grounded dataset introduced in RQ1. For each issue, we generate clarification questions using two models representing different parameter scales and code understand-ing capabilities: GPT-5 and GPT-5 nano (Singh et al., 2025). Both models are prompted to produce clarification questions targeting missing information in the underspecified issue (full prompts provided in Appendix A.5). To assess answerability, we compare each generated ques-tion against both the underspecified issue and its correspond-ing fully-specified original issue. We operationalize answer-ability relative to the information contained in the issue documentation. A question is considered answerable if it requests information that is missing from the underspecified issue but present in the fully-specified version. We use GPT-5 as an automatic judge to perform this classi-fication. The judge receives both the underspecified issue (the context available to the question-generating model) and the fully-specified issue (the reference source of complete information). It then assigns each question to one of three categories: • Answerable : The requested information appears in the fully-specified issue but is absent from the underspeci-fied issue (i.e., the question correctly targets missing information). • Unanswerable : The requested information does not appear in the fully-specified issue (i.e., the question requests information that is unlikely to be available to the user). • Redundant : The requested information already ap-pears in the underspecified issue. Answerability is approximated using the full issue as a proxy. Real user capability may be lower or higher than this proxy. This setup distinguishes questions that correctly request missing information from those that either ask for infor-mation already provided or request information that is not available in the issue context. For the analyses in this sec-tion, we focus on the distinction between answerable and 

unanswerable questions, leaving redundant questions to the analysis in RQ3. In total, we analyze clarification questions for 500 issues per model. 

5.2. Distributional Analysis: What Makes Questions Answerable? 

To understand what differentiates answerable from unan-swerable questions, we move beyond manual inspection to systematic analysis of question characteristics. We em-ploy distributional analysis (Zhong et al., 2023) to identify linguistic, structural, and semantic features that differ sig-nificantly between the two groups. Across GPT-5 and GPT-5 nano outputs, we compute a large set of candidate characteristics for each question and mea-sure their distributional differences between answerable and unanswerable sets using the Vargha–Delaney effect size (V ′). This analysis identifies 60 characteristics whose dis-tributions differ significantly ( p < 0.05 ). We then group related characteristics into higher-level strategic themes de-scribing how answerable questions are typically formulated. Table 2 summarizes the four dominant themes that emerge from this analysis. These strategies are orthogonal to the information taxonomy introduced in RQ1. While RQ1 identifies which information categories most influence task success, the strategies above describe how clarification questions should be formulated to ensure that users can realistically provide the requested information. For example, a poorly formulated question targeting an important category may still be unanswerable (e.g., What internal error handling logic failed? ). Conversely, a well-formulated question targeting a lower-impact category may remain answerable (e.g., What URL appears in the error message? ). Effective clarification therefore requires opti-mizing both dimensions: targeting high-value information and phrasing questions so that users can supply the answer. We observe similar patterns across both GPT-5 and GPT-5 nano outputs, suggesting that these strategies reflect general 5Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Table 2. Four strategic themes derived from distributional characteristics distinguishing answerable from unanswerable clarification questions. 

Strategy Description Answerable Exam-ple Unanswerable Ex-ample 

V ′ NGround in Evidence Request concrete artifacts users can directly share 

Share the stack trace What is the middle-ware execution order? 

0.111 23 

Demand Specificity Ask for precise values rather than abstract descriptions 

Which Python ver-sion? What is the optimal version? 

0.081 15 

Minimize Scope Request the smallest information unit isolat-ing the issue 

Provide a 10-line script demonstrating this Describe your entire architecture 

0.072 13 

Ensure Actionability Focus on actions users can perform or directly observe 

Run pytest -v 

and share output What would happen if you refactored? 

0.093 9                      

> V′= median effect size; N = discoveries per theme (60 total). All p < 0.05 . Complete results in Appendix A.6. 1234567
> Number of Clarification Questions
> 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> Task Success Rate
> Task
> 95% CI
> 1234567
> Number of Clarification Questions
> -0.40
> -0.20
> 0.00
> 0.20
> 0.40
> 0.60
> 0.80
> 1.00
> Answerability Proportion
> Answerability
> 95% CI
> 1234567
> Number of Clarification Questions
> -1.0
> 0.0
> 1.0
> 2.0
> 3.0
> 4.0
> Count of Answerable Questions  Count
> 95% CI

Figure 3. Task success as a function of the number of clarification questions asked. Performance plateaus as question count increases, while the proportion of answerable questions declines. 

properties of answerable question formulation rather than model-specific artifacts (complete results in Appendix A.6). 

5.3. Impact of Answerability on Performance 

Beyond individual questions, we also examine how the over-all composition of clarification sets influences downstream task success. In particular, we study the relationship be-tween the number of questions asked, the proportion of answerable questions, and task success. Figure 3 shows that increasing the number of questions does not consistently improve performance. Success rates plateau despite larger clarification sets. At the same time, the proportion of answerable questions decreases as question count increases. This pattern suggests that simply asking more questions does not guarantee better outcomes, and that the informational value of additional questions may be offset by the introduction of low-quality or unanswerable ones. These observations highlight the importance of concentrat-ing clarification effort on a small number of high-quality questions. Clarification sets with a higher proportion of answerable questions appear to correlate with stronger task performance while reducing user burden. Together with RQ1’s information impact hierarchy (which identifies which information categories matter most), these findings motivate the training strategy introduced in RQ3. Specifically, we design reward signals that encourage mod-els to target high-impact information while maintaining a high proportion of answerable questions, thereby prioritiz-ing both informational relevance and user accessibility. 

# 6. RQ3: Do Empirically-Grounded Objectives Improve Clarification? 

RQ1 identifies which types of missing information most strongly impact task success, while RQ2 characterizes which questions users can realistically answer. We now evaluate whether these principles, when directly utilized as training objectives, are sufficient to induce improved clarification behavior in a learned model. While multiple components contribute to overall performance, we design 6Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks                     

> Figure 4. Multi-stage reward pipeline with progressive filtering. Generated clarification sets flow through four sequential stages: (1)
> Non-Redundancy filters generations with high number of questions answerable from the underspecified issue (threshold r≥0.5), (2)
> Diversity filters generations with generic questions similar across different issues (threshold r≥0.5), (3) Answerability scores whether users can answer questions in the generation from the full issue, and (4) Task Relevance classifies questions in the generation into information categories weighted by empirical impact (RQ1). Final reward equally weights all stages: rfinal = 0 .25( rredundancy +rdiversity +
> ranswerability +rrelevance ).

RQ3 to primarily evaluate the impact of the learning ob-jective. We therefore keep the agent pipeline, dataset, and evaluation setup fixed, and introduce reward signals derived from RQ1 and RQ2 as the primary source of variation. 

6.1. Training Data and Model 

Training data is constructed from SWE-Gym Raw (Pan et al., 2025). Using DeepSeek-V3 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), we generate underspecified variants of real GitHub issues through a four-step pipeline: (i) removing selected information from the original issue, (ii) identifying missing information relative to the full issue, (iii) converting these gaps into clarification questions, and (iv) filtering questions which do not have grounding in the underspecified issue (containing entities only mentioned in the full issue) to pre-vent hallucinations. This yields 3,000 supervised fine-tuning (SFT) pairs and 1,000 distinct instances for reinforcement learning for training Qwen3 8B model (Yang et al., 2025). We first perform SFT to establish an initial capability for identifying missing information. Post-SFT, our model ex-hibits two main failure modes: it frequently asks about details already mentioned in the task description, and it uses generic question templates rather than adapting to issue-specific content. We address both through reinforcement learning with GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), optimizing directly for the properties identified in RQ1 and RQ2 via rubric-style rewards (Viswanathan et al., 2025; Dineen et al., 2025). 

6.2. Four-Stage Reward Pipeline 

A natural approach is to use downstream task success di-rectly as a training reward. However, this is computationally intractable for clarification: each training step would require running full agent trajectories (up to 30 state-action pairs of thousands of tokens each) per generated clarification set, with no decomposable signal distinguishing why a clari-fication helped or failed. Our intrinsic reward pipeline is designed to circumvent this bottleneck, using RQ1’s Shap-ley analysis to ground task relevance as a principled proxy for outcome, and RQ2’s distributional analysis to capture an-swerability constraints that outcome-based RL would need to discover implicitly, if at all. We design a four-stage reward pipeline that decomposes clarification quality into four measurable, intrinsic proper-ties: non-redundancy, diversity, answerability, and task rele-vance (Figure 4). Each stage applies a rejection threshold; candidates failing a stage receive zero reward and are not evaluated in subsequent stages. This progressive structure prioritizes simpler constraints before refining higher-level behavior and critically prevents each reward component from being gamed in isolation by earlier, easier-to-satisfy objectives. 

Stage 1: Non-redundancy Questions whose answers are already present in the underspecified issue are penalized: 

rnon-redundancy = 1 − redundant questions total questions .

This stage must precede all others because redundant ques-tions trivially satisfy answerability, and would otherwise inflate Stage 3 scores without any genuine information-seeking behavior. Placing this constraint first ensures that downstream reward signals measure what they are intended to measure. 

Stage 2: Diversity Generic questions and multiple ques-tions targeting the same information need are penalized: 

rdiversity = 1 − similar questions total questions .

Stage 1 filtering is insufficient to prevent template collapse: reusable question structures are not redundant with any spe-cific issue, but they reflect a degenerate policy that ignores 7Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

issue-specific content. Stage 2 penalizes lexical and seman-tic similarity both within a generation and across cached generations from the same training batch, encouraging the model to move toward questions that reference concrete, issue-specific entities rather than broadly applicable probes. 

Stage 3: Answerability Questions are scored by whether their answers appear in the fully specified issue: 

ranswerability = answerable questions total questions .

This uses RQ2’s finding that effective questions must remain within the knowledge boundaries of typical users. Diversity filtering in Stage 2 helps ensure that the model cannot sat-isfy answerability by learning question structures that are generically answerable across many issues, rather than by learning to identify what a specific user can provide. 

Stage 4: Task relevance Questions are classified into infor-mation categories (Section 2) and weighted by their empiri-cal importance from RQ1: 

rrelevance = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

w(category i).

Without this stage, the model distributes questions roughly according to the natural frequency of missing information in the training data, implicitly replicating the misalignment identified in RQ1: the most frequently missing category (Expected Behavior, present in 65% of underspecified is-sues) has lower predictive contribution to task success than categories missing less often, such as Error Information. Task relevance weighting helps corrects this by explicitly incentivizing questions that target high-impact information regardless of how commonly it is missing. The final reward equally weights all stages: 

rfinal = 14 (rnon-redundancy + rdiversity + ranswerability + rrelevance ).

Achieving improvements across all four stages requires strik-ing a balance between the desired properties. Maximizing reward for a particular stage clashes with the objectives for subsequent stages, making simple forms of reward hacking less effective since all stages are equally weighted. The trained model learns to strike trade-offs between the stages to achieve optimal clarification. We assign rewards using Qwen 3 32B as judge across all four stages during training and leverage GPT-5 as judge during evaluation to prevent bias. The tiered reward structure also helps the judge break the complex task of evaluating clarification into simpler sub-tasks which it can complete more reliably. 

6.3. Downstream Evaluation 

We evaluate the trained clarification module within the agent pipeline described in Section 3, keeping all other compo-nents fixed. Experiments are conducted on 250 underspeci-fied issues drawn from our categorization-grounded dataset. We compare: (i) no clarification baseline, (ii) GPT-5 Nano, (iii) GPT-5, (iv) our trained model, and (v) a fully specified upper bound. User responses are simulated by extracting answers from the fully specified issue, isolating clarification quality as the primary experimental variable. Importantly, training and evaluation distributions are intentionally sepa-rated with training data drawn from SWE-Gym Raw (differ-ent repositories from SWE-Bench Verified) and generated with DeepSeek-V3, while all evaluation datasets and judges use GPT-5, preventing overestimation of test set accuracy. 

6.4. Results 

Table 6 reports downstream performance. Without clarifica-tion, the agent solves 22.4% of tasks relative to the 41.6% fully specified baseline, confirming that missing information substantially impairs completion. All clarification methods improve over the no clarification baseline, but differ sub-stantially in how efficiently they use their question budget. Our model achieves 36.8% task success while generating only 3.0 questions on average—41% fewer than GPT-5 (5.1 questions)—recovering 88% of the fully specified perfor-mance. In practical terms, our model recovers comparable task success to GPT-5 while requiring roughly half the user interactions, suggesting that clarification quality matters more than clarification volume. The answerability scores are similar across our model and GPT-5 (0.373 vs. 0.369), which matches with the similar downstream performance observed. The more telling differ-entiator is the category allocation which allows our model to match the performance at a lower question count. As shown in Table 11, our model directs 26.4% of questions toward Error Information—the highest-impact category in RQ1—compared to 10.2% for GPT-5 and 6.0% for GPT-5 Nano. This reallocation is accompanied by reductions in lower-impact categories: Implementation Details drops from 16.4% (GPT-5) to 12.3%, and Reproduction Steps from 30.2% to 19.6%. The resulting distribution more closely tracks the empirical impact hierarchy from RQ1 than either baseline, consistent with the intended effect of task relevance weighting in Stage 4. The GPT models often cluster their questions around one or two categories for each issue, lacking diversity. The performance gap between the GPT models is consistent with the importance of answerabil-ity, as their relevance scores are similar while answerability differs. Training dynamics (Figure 6 in Appendix) reveal a struc-tured learning progression that reflects the dependency struc-ture of the reward pipeline. Early in training, most genera-tions fail the non-redundancy constraint, indicating that the SFT model frequently asks questions whose answers are 8Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks                                                       

> Table 3. Our model achieves 88% of the fully-specified perfor-mance ceiling with substantially fewer questions than GPT-5.
> Method Success ↑Answerability ↑Relevance ↑#Qs ↓
> No clarif. 22.4 ———Nano 29.6 .339 .576 5.2 GPT-5 35.6 .369 .580 5.1
> CLARITI 36.8 .373 .622 3.0
> Full issue 41.6 ———
> Table 4. We compare the distribution of questions produced by different models with the empirical impact of each question cate-gories on task success (from RQ1 in §4). Our model’s distribution more closely tracks the impact hierarchy than either baseline.
> Category Weight Nano GPT-5 CLARITI
> Error Info 0.340 6.0% 10.2% 26.4% Impl. Details 0.184 29.9% 16.4% 12.3% Version/Env. 0.163 11.8% 19.5% 16.1% Reproduction 0.143 24.7% 30.2% 19.6% Expected Behav. 0.105 24.1% 21.5% 16.7% External Ref. 0.065 3.4% 2.2% 5.5%

already present in the issue. As non-redundancy is satisfied, diversity improves, followed by gradual gains in answerabil-ity and task relevance. The delayed improvement in answer-ability is informative: unlike non-redundancy and diversity, which can be verified directly from the context window, an-swerability requires modeling what information lies outside the issue description—a harder generalization target that only becomes learnable once the simpler structural failures have been resolved. This ordering is consistent with the staged design acting as an implicit curriculum where sim-pler constraints are satisfied first due to rejection filtering, creating cleaner optimization signals for the properties that are harder to learn. 

6.5. Qualitative Analysis 

The quantitative results establish that the trained model asks fewer, more relevant questions. We now examine what this looks like in practice, using representative instances to iden-tify recurring patterns that explain where and why the mod-els diverge. Table 5 shows clarification questions generated by each model for sphinx-10435 , an instance in which the underspecified issue describes unexpected whitespace in PDF output but omits the error context, reproduction steps, and environment details. We also present more examples in the Appendix (Table 12. 

Budget misallocation toward lower-impact categories. 

Both GPT-5 and GPT-5 Nano ask valid questions but con-centrate their budget on moderate- and lower-impact cate-gories Table 11. GPT-5 Nano devotes three of four questions to version and reproduction information, while GPT-5 asks primarily about configuration and role definitions. In con-trast, our model leads with a screenshot request that directly targets the visible error manifestation—eliciting Error Infor-mation, the highest-impact category—followed by a focused reproduction request and a single version question. The dif-ference is in prioritization as all three models ask reasonable questions, but only our model’s is optimized to focus on most impactful information. 

Question burden and answerability. GPT-5 Nano’s questions are individually answerable but impose substan-tial cognitive load. Question 3 combines the full build workflow, specific commands, Makefile usage, and the 

.rst →.tex →.pdf pipeline into a single query. GPT-5’s question 3 requests a minimal project alongside the gen-erated .tex output and asks the user to distinguish explicit spaces from TeX glue—an internal rendering detail unlikely to be accessible to a typical issue reporter. By contrast, all three of our model’s questions were found to be answerable and involve concrete, observable artifacts: visual output, a code snippet, and version numbers. This pattern reflects the answerability strategies identified in RQ2—grounding in observable evidence, minimizing scope, and ensuring actionability—and illustrates how answerability training shapes not just whether questions can be answered, but how easily. 

Issue-conditioned vs. template-based questioning. 

Baseline models exhibit a tendency toward reusable question structures that transfer broadly across issues. GPT-5 Nano’s questions 1 and 3 could plausibly appear in any LaTeX-rendering bug report, regardless of the specific underspecification in this instance. Our model’s questions, by contrast, directly reference the observable symptom (in-correct visual output) and the specific component involved (Python role highlighting). This issue-conditioning is a direct consequence of the diversity reward by penalizing cross-issue similarity. Stage 2 pushes the model to anchor questions in concrete entities from the issue at hand rather than falling back on broadly applicable questions. 

Strategic abstention. In matplotlib-26208 , GPT-5 Nano generates only redundant questions and GPT-5 gener-ates only unanswerable ones. Our model asks no questions. This behavior is consistent with a tendency toward absten-tion when candidate questions would fail the reward con-straints. Asking low-quality questions imposes user burden without recovering useful information, making silence the better policy. Rather than indicating an explicitly learned abstention policy, this likely emerges as a byproduct of the staged reward design, which penalizes low-quality questions to reduce user burden. 9Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks                                                     

> Table 5. Qualitative analysis of clarification questions across models for the sphinx-10435 instance. Each question is labeled with its answerability status [A=Answerable, U=Unanswerable, R=Redundant] and information category [err=error information, re-pro=reproduction steps, exp=expected behavior, ver=version/environment]. Questions are abridged for space.
> Instance GPT-5 Nano GPT-5 CLARITI
> sphinx-10435 1. Exact versions of Sphinx, Python, Pygments, LaTeX toolchain? Any cus-tom latex elements or inline role? [A, ver] 2. Provide minimal RST snippet repro-ducing the issue with the inline role (e.g., :python:‘...‘ ). Do spaces occur without surrounding text? [R, re-pro] 3. Exact PDF build workflow? Com-mands, Makefile, latexmk usage, and .rst →.tex →.pdf sequence? Custom scripts? [A, repro] 4. Limited to Python role or occurs with other languages/roles and block highlights? Spaces in HTML output? [U, repro] 1. Versions (Sphinx, Pygments, TeX engine, OS) and build command for PDF? [A, ver] 2. How is the role defined? Share
> conf.py config and RST snippet. [A, ver] 3. Minimal project (one .rst +
> conf.py ) and generated .tex snip-pet? Explicit spaces or TeX glue in
> .tex ? [U, repro] 4. When did this start? Which versions did not have the issue? [A, ver] 1. Screenshots showing cor-rect vs. incorrect output? [A, err] 2. Reproducible example with Python role highlight-ing? [A, repro] 3. Relevant software ver-sions? [A, ver]
> Table 6. Ablation results. Removing either Stage 3 or Stage 4 substantially degrades task success, and SFT alone provides minimal gains over no clarification.
> Method Success ↑Answerability ↑Relevance ↑#Qs ↓
> No clarif. 22.4 ———SFT 24.2 .382 .583 1.5 w/o Stg 3 24.4 .341 .613 2.5 w/o Stg 4 32.0 .390 .596 2.2 All Stg 36.8 .373 .622 3.0

6.6. Reward Component Analysis Stage ablations. To validate that each reward stage con-tributes meaningfully, we compare the full pipeline against the SFT checkpoint and two stage-ablated variants in Ta-ble 6. SFT alone reaches only 24.2% task success with the fewest questions (1.5), confirming that supervised initializa-tion establishes basic behavior but does not learn principled strategies—RL contributes +12.6 points beyond this base-line. Removing Stage 3 (answerability) drops performance to 24.4%, nearly identical to no clarification, confirming that unanswerable questions actively degrade performance through context pollution rather than being merely neutral. Removing Stage 4 (task relevance) drops performance to 32.0%, validating the SHAP-weighted reward as a mean-ingful driver of task success. The tension between answer-ability and relevance scores across ablations suggests the full pipeline learns a joint trade-off that single-objective optimization would fail to capture. 

Stage failure modes. Each stage addresses a distinct fail-ure mode that earlier stages cannot catch. The most im-mediate is redundancy: without Stage 1, the model re-frames stated information as open questions (e.g., given 

the build fails with exit code 1 , asking What exit code does the build return? ), trivially maximizing later-stage rewards with no information gain. Stage 2 targets a subtler collapse where training converges on reusable templates—broad ver-sion queries, generic reproduction requests—that score well across issues regardless of content and are not caught by redundancy filtering alone. Stage 3 addresses questions that are issue-specific but target implementation internals users cannot observe ( What is the internal execution order of the middleware stack? ), a failure only distinguishable from valid questions after redundancy is controlled for. Finally, Stage 4 corrects for the frequency-importance misalignment iden-tified in RQ1: without it, questions cluster toward External References and Expected Behavior despite their lower em-pirical impact. Each stage is thus a necessary precondition for the next to measure what it intends to measure. However, training cannot bridge all the gaps. The model struggles when underspecification requires deep code com-prehension to detect—it can identify surface-level gaps but cannot bridge from issue symptoms to underlying imple-mentation concepts as reliably as GPT-5 which is superior in this aspect. 

# 7. Related Work 

7.1. Clarification and Ambiguity Resolution 

Ambiguity handling in NLP typically decomposes into de-tection and clarification. Prior work on uncertainty estima-tion and self-disambiguation enables models to recognize when user input is incomplete or ambiguous (Lin et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Hou et al., 2024). Pipeline-style 10 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

systems combine ambiguity detection with clarification gen-eration (Tang et al., 2025; Zhang & Choi, 2025), often es-timating the prospective value of interaction as a proxy for detecting missing information (Zhang et al., 2025a; Zhang & Choi, 2025). Benchmarks such as CLAMBER and ClarQ-LLM (Zhang et al., 2024; Gan et al., 2024) evaluate LLMs’ ability to identify and resolve ambiguity across open-domain QA, search, and task-oriented dialog. Complementary works define taxonomies of linguistic, referential, and pragmatic ambiguity, measuring LLM robustness under multiple in-terpretations (Madge et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024; Niwa & Iso, 2024; Sumanathilaka et al., 2025). Multi-intent QA work (Niwa & Iso, 2024; Kim et al., 2024; Zhang & Choi, 2025) further highlights the value of targeted disambigua-tion. CQ generation techniques include framework-guided prompting (Mu et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2025) and ensemble-based selection (Zhang & Choi, 2025; Zhang et al., 2025a). These systems generally optimize for conversational clarity or linguistic coverage focusing on singular or limited, lin-guistic points of ambiguity, whereas many real tasks require selecting multiple, most valuable piece of missing informa-tion. Our work focuses on this task-productivity perspective by identifying which clarification question yields the great-est downstream utility, under user answerability constraints, in complex underspecified problem settings. 

7.2. Clarification in Agentic Settings 

Ambiguity in agentic environments introduces additional challenges. Agents must decide when to query and what in-formation blocks progress. Recent methods integrate struc-tured uncertainty estimation to trigger interaction (Suri et al., 2025), and supervised or contrastive training to improve querying behavior (Zhang et al., 2025b; Chen et al., 2025), while other works analyze broader underspecification in SWE agents (Vijayvargiya et al., 2025). Other lines incor-porate user modeling through Theory-of-Mind (Zhou et al., 2025), explicit classification–clarification modules (Darji & Lutellier, 2025), or proactive/personalized query poli-cies optimized for user burden and task success (Sun et al., 2025). Software engineering is a frequent evaluation do-main due to its rich specifications and verifiable success metrics (Jimenez et al., 2024). Our work differs in two key ways. First, we isolate the single-turn clarification problem to study what makes clarifi-cations maximally productive for downstream task comple-tion, rather than modeling multi-turn interaction strategies. Second, we systematically quantify the impact of different information types on task success and use these empirical findings to design training objectives. Rather than relying on generic quality heuristics, we ground our approach in empirical analysis of which missing information matters most, which questions are answerable, and how these fac-tors predict downstream performance. 

# 8. Conclusions 

In this work, we establish that effective clarification depends on two complementary properties: task relevance (which information impacts success) and user answerability (what users can realistically provide). Through Shapley analysis, we find a clear hierarchy of information needs that contribute to task success. Distributional analysis reveals four strategic characteristics to generating answerable questions: ground-ing in evidence, demanding specificity, minimizing scope, and ensuring actionability. Leveraging these insights, we train CLARITI, an 8B parameter module, matching GPT-5 while generating 41% fewer questions. However, our study has limitations. Our single-turn design isolates clarification quality but does not capture multi-turn dynamics. The software engineering focus for empirical grounding provides domain-specific findings, although our methodology generalizes. Finally, the LLM judge enables scalable evaluation, but may diverge from human judgment. Future work should implement the effective clarification strategies across domains and multi-turn settings. In conclu-sion, we establish a generalizable training methodology— quantify information impact, identify answerable character-istics, operationalize via multi-stage rewards—applicable wherever agents must extract information from users to complete tasks. 

# Impact Statement 

Our work focuses on improving how AI agents clarify un-derspecified tasks through better question generation. By enabling more efficient human-AI interaction, this research could reduce user burden and allow general models to im-prove performance in software engineering and similar tech-nical domains. The techniques we develop are general-purpose methods and do not introduce novel risks beyond those present in large language model deployment, which have been documented in prior work. 

# References 

ByteDance Seed Team. Seed-oss open-source models release, August 2025. URL 

https://seed.bytedance.com/en/blog/ seed-oss-open-source-models-release .Accessed: 2026-01-28. Chen, M., Sun, R., Pfister, T., and Arik, S. Learning to clarify: Multi-turn conversations with action-based con-trastive self-training, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2406.00222 .11 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Chowdhury, N., Aung, J., Shern, C. J., Jaffe, O., Sher-burn, D., Starace, G., Mays, E., Dias, R., Aljubeh, M., Glaese, M., Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Liu, K., and Madry, A. Introducing SWE-bench veri-fied, 2024. URL https://openai.com/index/ introducing-swe-bench-verified/ . Ac-cessed on December 10, 2024. Darji, H. and Lutellier, T. Curiosity by design: An llm-based coding assistant asking clarification questions, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.21285 .DeepSeek-AI, Liu, A., Feng, B., Xue, B., Wang, B., Wu, B., Lu, C., Zhao, C., Deng, C., Zhang, C., Ruan, C., Dai, D., Guo, D., Yang, D., Chen, D., Ji, D., Li, E., Lin, F., Dai, F., Luo, F., Hao, G., Chen, G., Li, G., Zhang, H., Bao, H., Xu, H., Wang, H., Zhang, H., Ding, H., Xin, H., Gao, H., Li, H., Qu, H., Cai, J. L., Liang, J., Guo, J., Ni, J., Li, J., Wang, J., Chen, J., Chen, J., Yuan, J., Qiu, J., Li, J., Song, J., Dong, K., Hu, K., Gao, K., Guan, K., Huang, K., Yu, K., Wang, L., Zhang, L., Xu, L., Xia, L., Zhao, L., Wang, L., Zhang, L., Li, M., Wang, M., Zhang, M., Zhang, M., Tang, M., Li, M., Tian, N., Huang, P., Wang, P., Zhang, P., Wang, Q., Zhu, Q., Chen, Q., Du, Q., Chen, R. J., Jin, R. L., Ge, R., Zhang, R., Pan, R., Wang, R., Xu, R., Zhang, R., Chen, R., Li, S. S., Lu, S., Zhou, S., Chen, S., Wu, S., Ye, S., Ye, S., Ma, S., Wang, S., Zhou, S., Yu, S., Zhou, S., Pan, S., Wang, T., Yun, T., Pei, T., Sun, T., Xiao, W. L., Zeng, W., Zhao, W., An, W., Liu, W., Liang, W., Gao, W., Yu, W., Zhang, W., Li, X. Q., Jin, X., Wang, X., Bi, X., Liu, X., Wang, X., Shen, X., Chen, X., Zhang, X., Chen, X., Nie, X., Sun, X., Wang, X., Cheng, X., Liu, X., Xie, X., Liu, X., Yu, X., Song, X., Shan, X., Zhou, X., Yang, X., Li, X., Su, X., Lin, X., Li, Y. K., Wang, Y. Q., Wei, Y. X., Zhu, Y. X., Zhang, Y., Xu, Y., Xu, Y., Huang, Y., Li, Y., Zhao, Y., Sun, Y., Li, Y., Wang, Y., Yu, Y., Zheng, Y., Zhang, Y., Shi, Y., Xiong, Y., He, Y., Tang, Y., Piao, Y., Wang, Y., Tan, Y., Ma, Y., Liu, Y., Guo, Y., Wu, Y., Ou, Y., Zhu, Y., Wang, Y., Gong, Y., Zou, Y., He, Y., Zha, Y., Xiong, Y., Ma, Y., Yan, Y., Luo, Y., You, Y., Liu, Y., Zhou, Y., Wu, Z. F., Ren, Z. Z., Ren, Z., Sha, Z., Fu, Z., Xu, Z., Huang, Z., Zhang, Z., Xie, Z., Zhang, Z., Hao, Z., Gou, Z., Ma, Z., Yan, Z., Shao, Z., Xu, Z., Wu, Z., Zhang, Z., Li, Z., Gu, Z., Zhu, Z., Liu, Z., Li, Z., Xie, Z., Song, Z., Gao, Z., and Pan, Z. Deepseek-v3 technical report, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437 .Dineen, J., Rrv, A., Liu, Q., Xu, Z., Ye, X., Shen, M., Li, Z., Lu, S., Baral, C., Chen, M., and Zhou, B. QA-LIGN: Aligning LLMs through constitutionally decom-posed QA. In Christodoulopoulos, C., Chakraborty, T., Rose, C., and Peng, V. (eds.), Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 ,pp. 20619–20642, Suzhou, China, November 2025. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-335-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-emnlp. 1123. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. findings-emnlp.1123/ .Gan, Y., Li, C., Xie, J., Wen, L., Purver, M., and Poesio, M. Clarq-llm: A benchmark for models clarifying and re-questing information in task-oriented dialog, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.06097 .Hou, B., Liu, Y., Qian, K., Andreas, J., Chang, S., and Zhang, Y. Decomposing uncertainty for large language models through input clarification ensembling, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08718 .Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press, O., and Narasimhan, K. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06770 .Kim, H. J., Kim, Y., Park, C., Kim, J., Park, C., Yoo, K. M., goo Lee, S., and Kim, T. Aligning language models to explicitly handle ambiguity, 2024. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2404.11972 .Lin, S., Hilton, J., and Evans, O. Teaching models to ex-press their uncertainty in words, 2022. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2205.14334 .Lundberg, S. and Lee, S.-I. A unified approach to interpret-ing model predictions, 2017. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/1705.07874 .MacQueen, K. M., McLellan, E., Kay, K., and Milstein, B. Codebook development for team-based qualitative analysis. Cam Journal , 10(2):31–36, 1998. Madge, C., Purver, M., and Poesio, M. Referential ambi-guity and clarification requests: comparing human and LLM behaviour. In Ogrodniczuk, M., Novak, M., Poesio, M., Pradhan, S., and Ng, V. (eds.), Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Computational Models of Reference, Anaphora and Coreference , pp. 1–11, Suzhou, China, November 2025. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.crac-1.1. URL https: //aclanthology.org/2025.crac-1.1/ .Mu, F., Shi, L., Wang, S., Yu, Z., Zhang, B., Wang, C., Liu, S., and Wang, Q. Clarifygpt: A framework for enhancing llm-based code generation via requirements clarification. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. , 1(FSE), July 2024. doi: 10.1145/3660810. URL https://doi.org/10. 1145/3660810 .Niwa, A. and Iso, H. Ambignlg: Addressing task ambiguity in instruction for nlg, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2402.17717 .12 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Pan, J., Wang, X., Neubig, G., Jaitly, N., Ji, H., Suhr, A., and Zhang, Y. Training software engineering agents and verifiers with swe-gym, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2412.21139 .Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Bi, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Li, Y. K., Wu, Y., and Guo, D. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemat-ical reasoning in open language models, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300 .Singh, A., Fry, A., Perelman, A., Tart, A., Ganesh, A., El-Kishky, A., McLaughlin, A., Low, A., Ostrow, A., Ananthram, A., et al. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267 , 2025. Sumanathilaka, T. G. D. K., Micallef, N., and Hough, J. Can llms assist with ambiguity? a quantitative evaluation of various large language models on word sense disam-biguation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2411.18337 .Sun, W., Zhou, X., Du, W., Wang, X., Welleck, S., Neubig, G., Sap, M., and Yang, Y. Training proactive and person-alized llm agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2511.02208 .Suri, M., Mathur, P., Lipka, N., Dernoncourt, F., Rossi, R. A., and Manocha, D. Structured uncertainty guided clarification for llm agents, 2025. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2511.08798 .Tang, A., Soulier, L., and Guigue, V. Clarifying ambi-guities: on the role of ambiguity types in prompting methods for clarification generation. In Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Re-search and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’25, pp. 20–30, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Associa-tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400715921. doi: 10.1145/3726302.3729922. URL https://doi. org/10.1145/3726302.3729922 .Vijayvargiya, S., Zhou, X., Yerukola, A., Sap, M., and Neubig, G. Interactive agents to overcome ambiguity in software engineering, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2502.13069 .Viswanathan, V., Sun, Y., Ma, S., Kong, X., Cao, M., Neu-big, G., and Wu, T. Checklists are better than reward mod-els for aligning language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 38, 2025. Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q., Chi, E., Narang, S., Chowdhery, A., and Zhou, D. Self-consistency im-proves chain of thought reasoning in language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171 , 2022. Wang, X., Li, B., Song, Y., Xu, F. F., Tang, X., Zhuge, M., Pan, J., Song, Y., Li, B., Singh, J., Tran, H. H., Li, F., Ma, R., Zheng, M., Qian, B., Shao, Y., Muennighoff, N., Zhang, Y., Hui, B., Lin, J., Brennan, R., Peng, H., Ji, H., and Neubig, G. Openhands: An open platform for ai software developers as generalist agents, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16741 .Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., Zheng, C., Liu, D., Zhou, F., Huang, F., Hu, F., Ge, H., Wei, H., Lin, H., Tang, J., Yang, J., Tu, J., Zhang, J., Yang, J., Yang, J., Zhou, J., Zhou, J., Lin, J., Dang, K., Bao, K., Yang, K., Yu, L., Deng, L., Li, M., Xue, M., Li, M., Zhang, P., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Men, R., Gao, R., Liu, S., Luo, S., Li, T., Tang, T., Yin, W., Ren, X., Wang, X., Zhang, X., Ren, X., Fan, Y., Su, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Wan, Y., Liu, Y., Wang, Z., Cui, Z., Zhang, Z., Zhou, Z., and Qiu, Z. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388 .Zhang, M. J. and Choi, E. Clarify when necessary: Resolv-ing ambiguity through interaction with LMs. In Chiruzzo, L., Ritter, A., and Wang, L. (eds.), Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 ,pp. 5526–5543, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-naacl. 306. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. findings-naacl.306/ .Zhang, M. J. Q., Knox, W. B., and Choi, E. Modeling future conversation turns to teach llms to ask clarifying questions, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2410.13788 .Zhang, T., Qin, P., Deng, Y., Huang, C., Lei, W., Liu, J., Jin, D., Liang, H., and Chua, T.-S. Clamber: Abenchmark of identifying and clarifying ambiguous in-formation needs in large language models, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12063 .Zhang, X., Shen, Y., Zheng, Z., Wu, L., Zhang, W., Yan, Y., Peng, Q., Wang, J., and Lu, W. Asktoact: Enhancing llms tool use via self-correcting clarification, 2025b. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01940 .Zhong, R., Zhang, P., Li, S., Ahn, J., Klein, D., and Stein-hardt, J. Goal driven discovery of distributional differ-ences via language descriptions, 2023. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2302.14233 .Zhou, X., Chen, V., Wang, Z. Z., Neubig, G., Sap, M., and Wang, X. Tom-swe: User mental modeling for soft-ware engineering agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2510.21903 .13 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

# A. Appendix 

A.1. Information Needs Annotation 

Instance ID Annotator Notes Missing Information 

22 (as-tropy astropy-13469) The issue is stated in the description - When trying to convert a list of Tables to a NumPy array, it is automatically converted to the wrong data structure, but if the type is specified (dtype=object), a ValueError is raised. But since the referenced issue is a stackoverflow external link, it will be difficult to grasp exactly how the issue occurs, and what the expected outcome should be Reproduction steps, Expected behav-ior 78 (django django-10531) The description lacks details about the Django version affected (issue desc talks about some old versions of django), which is crucial since Django’s handling of verbose names might differ across versions. Additionally, there is no mention of the specific Django admin com-ponents involved, such as whether the issue is with LogEntry objects, the ModelAdmin class, or specific methods that handle the rendering of change messages in the admin history. Without specifics on the Django components affected or a clearer outline of when the issue arises, a developer would face uncertainty in determining the exact scope and location of the necessary code changes. There is too much room for ambiguity. It is unclear what a successful solution would look like. Version information, Expected behav-ior, Implementation details 94 (django django-11019) The problem statement only explains the issue related to MyForm().media , which is that merging three media objects in Django form throws an unnecessary 

MediaOrderConflictWarning error. The error is also misleading. It suggests that “text-editor-extras.js” and “text-editor.js” are conflicting files, while the actual issue is the ordering of “color-picker.js” and “text-editor.js”. Moreover, the desired solution is not mentioned in the description of how to solve this issue. Error information, Expected behavior 117 (django django-11185) The issue mentions that Model.delete(keep parents=True) 

does not preserve all parent reverse relationships but does not specify which relationships are not preserved or provide examples of the failing cases. Without specific details or examples, it’s unclear what exactly needs to be fixed. The phrase “relationships toward parents of parents, and so on” suggests a recursive or hierarchical problem, but it’s not clear how deep this issue goes or what the expected behavior in various nested scenarios should be. This could lead to multiple interpretations of the problem. Error information, Reproduction steps, Expected behavior 129 (django django-11279) The problem statement requests a new functional-ity in a Django model structure that includes the 

%(app label)s and %(class)s placeholder in the name 

argument for BaseConstraint , CheckConstraint ,

UniqueConstraint , and Index . The actual issue and er-ror are not mentioned in the description. Error information 

Table 7. Examples of underspecified instances from the SWE-bench dataset with annotator notes and identified missing information categories. 

A.2. Prompts for Controlled Underspecification Generation Prompt 1: Identifying Present Information Categories 

System Message: You are an expert at analyzing GitHub issues and identifying types of information present. 

User Message: 

Analyze the following GitHub issue and identify which categories of information are present. TAXONOMY OF INFORMATION CATEGORIES: • Error Information: What is going wrong, why is it wrong, and how do we know? (e.g., stack traces, error strings, incorrect 

14 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

output descriptions, why is the behavior incorrect, any description of problematic behavior) • Reproduction Steps: Under what conditions does the failure occur? (e.g., CLI commands, minimal inputs, trigger conditions) • Implementation Details: How should the solution be implemented? (e.g., proposed solutions, implementation approaches) • Version/Environment Information: What configuration is necessary? (e.g., dependency versions, OS details, config flags) • External References: What external resources influence this? (e.g., API docs, datasets, upstream contracts, links, commit hashes, any description of what external reference contains) • Expected Behavior: What should happen instead? (e.g., intended output format, correct return values, desired state, any description of correct behavior) GITHUB ISSUE: [Issue text, test patch, and solution patch] For each category that has information present in the issue, identify: 1. The category name (exactly as listed above) 2. Specific examples of that information from the issue Output your analysis in JSON format with this structure: 

{"Error Information": {"present": true/false, "examples": ["specific quote 1", "specific quote 2", ...] }, ... }

Be thorough and identify ALL categories that have relevant information. Include specific quotes/examples from the issue for each category marked as present. Output ONLY the JSON, no other text. 

Prompt 2: Generating Underspecified Issue Variants 

System Message: You are a GitHub issue writer who creates realistic but incomplete issues. 

User Message: 

You are rewriting a GitHub issue to hide specific types of information while keeping it realistic. Original GitHub Issue: [Issue text, test patch, and solution patch] CATEGORY MAPPING (for reference - may have extra or missing items): [For each category to hide, examples of that information from the original issue] You MUST completely remove ALL mentions of these information types: [List of categories to hide with their definitions and examples] CRITICAL INSTRUCTIONS: 1. Remove EVERY mention of the information types listed above, except error information and expected behavior where if removing all mentions make the issue unnatural, then vaguely describe it, or remove important parts. 2. Use the category mapping as reference (but note it may have extra or missing items - use your judgment) 3. If you remove reproduction steps, remove sufficient/ALL commands, inputs, and trigger conditions 4. If you remove error information, remove sufficient stack traces, error messages, and incorrect output descriptions 5. If you remove implementation details, remove important/ALL proposed solutions and approaches 6. If you remove version/environment info, remove most/ALL dependency versions, OS details, configs 7. If you remove external references, remove ALL links, API docs, dataset mentions, commit hashes, and descriptions of external reference content. 8. If you remove expected behavior, remove sufficient descriptions of what should happen or correct behavior 9. Write like a REAL developer - natural, authentic, no theatrical language 10. Do NOT add extra formatting that real developers don’t use 

15 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

11. Do NOT mention what you removed or that information is missing 12. The result should sound like an incomplete but real issue [If applicable: Previous rewrites hid these categories: ... Make sure your rewrite is DIFFERENT from these previous versions.] Output ONLY the rewritten issue inside <rewrite></rewrite> tags. Include NO other text, explanations, or metadata. 

A.3. Annotation Process Example 

This section illustrates the complete annotation pipeline for a single instance, showing how we transform original GitHub issues into underspecified versions through GPT-5-based annotation and selective information hiding. 

Instance ID 

instance id : astropy astropy-14182 

Step 1: Original Issue 

Title: Consider removing auto-transform of structured column into NdarrayMixin 

Description: 

Currently if you add a structured np.array to a Table, it gets turned into an NdarrayMixin (via the code below). While this mostly works, I am not sure this is necessary or desirable any more after #12644. Basically the original rational for 

NdarrayMixin was that structured dtype Column didn’t quite work, in particular for serialization. So we pushed that out to a mixin class which would signal to unified I/O that it might not be supported. 

# Structured ndarray gets viewed as a mixin unless already a valid # mixin class if (not isinstance(data, Column) and not data_is_mixin and isinstance(data, np.ndarray) and len(data.dtype) > 1): data = data.view(NdarrayMixin) data_is_mixin = True 

Proposal: 

• Add a FutureWarning here telling the user to wrap data in Column and that in the future (5.2) the structured array will be added as a Column .• Change the behavior in 5.2 by removing this clause. This is not critical for 5.1 but if we have the opportunity due to other (critical) bugfixes it might be nice to save 6 months in the change process. cc: @mhvk 

Step 2: Categories Identification (GPT-5 Annotation) 

The following information categories were identified in the original issue: 

Error Information: Not present 

Reproduction Steps: Present • Test directly adding various forms of structured ndarray columns to a table. • a = np.array([(1, ’a’), (2, ’b’), (3, ’c’), (4, ’d’)], dtype=’<i4,’ + (’|U1’)) 

• t = Table([a], names=[’a’]) 

• t[’b’] = b

Implementation Details: Present • Add a FutureWarning telling the user to wrap data in Column 

• Change the behavior in 5.2 by removing this clause • Solution Patch removes the clause that views structured ndarray as NdarrayMixin 

16 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

• Test Patch parameterizes test to compare behavior with and without NdarrayMixin view 

Version/Environment Information: Present • ”in the future (5.2) the structured array will be added as a Column ”• ”This is not critical for 5.1 but...” 

External References: Present • after #12644 • https://github.com/astropy/astropy/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md 

Expected Behavior: Present • In the future (5.2) the structured array will be added as a Column 

• Add a FutureWarning telling users to wrap data in Column 

Step 3: Hidden Information Selection 

For this instance, the following information types were randomly selected to be hidden: 1. Version/Environment Information: What configuration is necessary? (e.g., dependency versions, OS details, config flags) • Examples: ”in the future (5.2) the structured array will be added as a Column ”; ”This is not critical for 5.1...” 2. External References: What external resources influence this? (e.g., API docs, datasets, upstream contracts, links, commit hashes) • Examples: “after #12644”; https://github.com/astropy/astropy/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md 3. Expected Behavior: What should happen instead? (e.g., intended output format, correct return values, desired state) • Examples: ”in the future (5.2) the structured array will be added as a Column ”; ”Add a FutureWarning here telling the user to wrap data in Column ”

Step 4: Underspecified Issue (Rewritten with Hidden Information) 

Title: Consider removing automatic wrapping of structured arrays in the tabular container 

Description: 

When a structured array is added to the tabular container, it is automatically wrapped in a mixin. This generally works, but the original rationale was related to limitations around handling structured data for serialization. With improved support for structured arrays, the automatic wrapping may no longer be necessary and can be surprising to users who expect a plain structured column. This behavior also has downstream effects on type checks and I/O pathways, which can make the user experience inconsistent. It would be useful to re-evaluate whether the auto-wrapping is still needed, and gather examples where it remains beneficial versus cases where a structured array behaves correctly without being treated as a mixin. 

Questions: 

• Are there current use cases where automatic wrapping is still required for correctness? • Would removing the auto-wrapping introduce practical regressions for typical workflows? • If changes are made, what level of notice or transition plan would be appropriate for users? 

A.4. Shapley analysis 

We use an ensemble approach with three model architectures: (1) Logistic Regression with L2 regularization, (2) Random Forest with 100 trees and max depth 5, and (3) Gradient Boosting with 100 estimators and max depth 3. For each model, we compute SHAP values using appropriate explainers (LinearExplainer for logistic regression, TreeExplainer for tree-based models). We report the mean absolute SHAP value across all three models to provide a robust importance estimate that is not dependent on any single modeling choice. Cross-validation accuracy is computed using 5-fold stratified splits to verify 17 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

that models achieve reasonable predictive performance (all models achieve > 0.80 accuracy, substantially above the 0.52 baseline of predicting the majority class). 

A.5. Clarification Questions Prompt: Generating Clarification Questions     

> System Message: You are an expert software developer reviewing a GitHub issue.
> User Message:
> You are an assistant helping to clarify software engineering issue descriptions. Given the following issue, generate a limited number of targeted clarification questions as a developer to get the information needed to solve the issue. Output format:
> 1. ... 2. ... 3. ...
> Problem Statement: [Underspecified issue text]

A.6. Distributional Data Analysis Findings 

Here we present the complete results from our D5 analysis comparing answerable versus non-answerable clarification questions. We conducted three analyses: (1) cross-model (pooling questions from all models), (2) GPT-5 within-model, and (3) GPT-Nano within-model. Each analysis identified characteristics that distinguish answerable questions (targeting information present in the original issue) from non-answerable questions (asking for unavailable information). Tables 8–10 present the top 20 discoveries from each analysis. These discoveries are grouped by formulation strategy to emphasize that they describe how to ask (question design) rather than what to ask about (information categories from Table 1 in the main paper). 18 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Table 8. Top 20 Question Formulation Characteristics: Cross-Model Analysis (All Models Pooled) 

Rank Strategy Characteristic V’ Sig. 

Evidence Grounding (anchoring in concrete, verifiable artifacts) 

1 EG Requests concrete, copy-pasteable evidence such as stack traces, logs, or minimal code 0.191 *** 5 EG Anchors questions to concrete, user-observable artifacts like logs, warnings, and files 0.111 *** 7 EG Requests exact error text and full stack traces to avoid paraphrase loss 0.101 *** 9 EG Requests concrete code wiring details to reveal lifecycle and instantiation patterns 0.095 *** 11 EG Focuses on observable behaviors such as error messages, stack traces, and logs 0.079 ** 16 EG Ties questions to concrete artifacts the user can inspect directly 0.045 *** 

Precision Targeting (requesting exact values rather than categories) 

3 PT Asks for exact API calls and option values to enable precise replication 0.116 *** 6 PT References specific API calls and parameters the user likely executed 0.108 *** 10 PT Uses method names and parameter signatures to ensure alignment on exact code path 0.081 *** 17 PT Requests exact naming and import paths to resolve discovery/import ambiguity 0.040 20 PT Solicits context propagation paths to trace variables 0.031 ** 

Scope Minimization (isolating minimal reproducible cases) 

4 SM Requests a minimal reproducible example with exact inputs, operations, and outputs 0.116 *** 8 SM Prioritizes minimal reproducible examples to enable verification 0.098 *** 12 SM Requests a minimal reproducible example to anchor discussion in concrete artifacts 0.070 *** 13 SM Requests end-to-end snippets that show how data flows through the system 0.060 ** 15 SM Isolates the smallest unit that can demonstrate the issue 0.048 ** 18 SM Solicits input-output pairs to demonstrate the discrepancy explicitly 0.038 ** 

User Actionability (focusing on immediate, performable actions) 

2 UA Limits questions to practical actions the user can perform immediately 0.167 *** 14 UA Narrows the query to immediate, user-observable symptoms or artifacts 0.057 ** 19 UA Asks for how constructs are built to track provenance 0.033 *

Strategy codes: EG = Evidence Grounding, PT = Precision Targeting, SM = Scope Minimization, UA = User Actionability 

Significance: *** p < 0.001 , ** p < 0.01 , * p < 0.05 

Note: V’ represents the difference in validator scores between answerable and non-answerable questions (higher values = more characteristic of answerable questions). 

19 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Table 9. Top 20 Question Formulation Characteristics: GPT-5 Within-Model Analysis 

Rank Strategy Characteristic V’ Sig. 

Evidence Grounding 

1 EG Prompts for copy-pasteable artifacts (commands run, config snippets, logs) 0.178 *** 2 EG Focuses on immediate, user-observable artifacts 0.164 *** 4 EG Asks for concrete, reproducible artifacts such as stack traces and code snippets 0.149 *** 7 EG Solicits full stack traces and exact error strings to remove ambiguity 0.113 *** 10 EG Aims for artifacts that can be validated or shared verbatim 0.108 *** 15 EG Requests exception details or tracebacks during execution 0.064 *

Precision Targeting 

8 PT Frames around specific entry points or workflows the user actually executes 0.111 *** 9 PT Specifies exact entry points rather than broad features 0.110 *** 16 PT Emphasizes precise version and environment details 0.061 *

Scope Minimization 

3 SM Prioritizes minimal reproducible artifacts the user can generate 0.160 *** 13 SM Seeks deterministic reproduction paths with ordered steps 0.077 *14 SM Asks for minimal reproducible examples without external tooling 0.072 ** 18 SM Constrains scope to concrete behaviors of a single tool 0.052 *19 SM Requests direct mapping from inputs to outputs 0.047 *

User Actionability 

5 UA Targets information the user can readily inspect in their local repo or runtime 0.134 *** 6 UA Seeks step-by-step details of what the user did and what happened next 0.118 *** 12 UA Leverages standard diagnostics the user can run 0.093 ** 20 UA Asks for measurable baselines and performance expectations 0.047 ** 

Other Strategies 

11 Other Reduces ambiguity by anchoring in familiar workflows 0.093 ** 17 Other Encourages confirmation of which known scenario occurred 0.053 

Strategy codes: EG = Evidence Grounding, PT = Precision Targeting, SM = Scope Minimization, UA = User Actionability 

Significance: *** p < 0.001 , ** p < 0.01 , * p < 0.05 

20 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Table 10. Top 20 Question Formulation Characteristics: GPT-Nano Within-Model Analysis 

Rank Strategy Characteristic V’ Sig. 

Evidence Grounding 

1 EG Frames requests around artifacts the user can share 0.181 *** 2 EG Anchors on artifacts the user can directly observe or produce 0.163 *** 5 EG Asks for exact identifiers and messages present in the user’s environment 0.097 ** 12 EG Requests before/after evidence to localize the discrepancy 0.058 *** 13 EG Relies on stack traces and test outputs as ground truth 0.050 16 EG Minimizes ambiguity by asking for exact strings and snippets 0.041 *19 EG Requests complete contextual snippets around the problematic entry 0.036 

Precision Targeting 

6 PT Investigates how components are wired together in the user’s code path 0.066 *8 PT Probes implementation wiring details the user can inspect 0.062 *9 PT Leverages terminology and structures likely present in the user’s code 0.062 *15 PT Emphasizes exact locations to enable precise mapping of symptoms 0.044 18 PT Requests exact identifiers to disambiguate context 0.036 

Scope Minimization 

3 SM Invites a minimal reproducible example to ground discussion in code 0.154 *** 4 SM Solicits a minimal reproducible example to anchor discussion 0.129 *** 10 SM Asks for minimal reproducible examples to verify the issue 0.059 *14 SM Focuses on pipeline stage localization to isolate failure points 0.044 *17 SM Uses constrained alternatives to isolate causes 0.041 20 SM Narrows scope to a single component or interaction path 0.032 

User Actionability 

7 UA Ties questions to concrete tooling steps within a familiar workflow 0.063 *11 UA Aims to reproduce errors under controlled conditions in CI 0.058 

Strategy codes: EG = Evidence Grounding, PT = Precision Targeting, SM = Scope Minimization, UA = User Actionability 

Significance: *** p < 0.001 , ** p < 0.01 , * p < 0.05 

Across all three analyses, we identified 60 top discoveries (20 per analysis). Table ?? summarizes the distribution of discoveries by formulation strategy and provides examples of how each strategy manifests across different analyses. 

A.7. Intrinsic Evaluations Prompt: Answerability Evaluation 

System Message: Evaluate whether each question can be answered from the original issue vs the underspecified issue. For EACH question, determine if it’s answerable from each source. Respond ONLY with valid JSON. 

User Message: 

Underspecified Issue (Context): [Underspecified rewrite variant] Original Issue: [Original problem statement] Questions: 1. Question 1 2. Question 2 3. ... For EACH question, determine: 1. Can it be answered from the ORIGINAL issue? (true/false) 2. Can it be answered from the UNDERSPECIFIED issue? (true/false) A question that is generic like “provide more details”, “clarify requirements” and does not ask for specific information should be marked as NOT answerable from either (both false). Respond with ONLY this JSON (no extra text): 

21 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

{"questions": [{"question_num": 1, "question_text": "<brief quote>", "answerable_from_original": true/false, "answerable_from_underspecified": true/false, "reasoning": "<brief explanation>" }, ... ]}

Note: Questions are categorized as: (1) answerable original only (answerable from original but not underspecified), (2) 

non answerable (not answerable from either), or (3) answerable both (answerable from both, discarded from analysis). 

Prompt: Task Relevance Evaluation 

System Message: You are evaluating whether clarification questions are relevant to solving a software engineering task. Respond ONLY with valid JSON. 

User Message: 

Task Context: [Underspecified issue rewrite variant] Clarification Questions: 1. Question 1 2. Question 2 3. ... For EACH question, evaluate whether it is relevant to solving the software engineering task described in the context. A question is relevant if: • It seeks information needed to understand, reproduce, or fix the issue • It asks about technical details, error conditions, or implementation requirements • The answer would help a developer make progress on the task A question is not relevant if: • It is overly generic (e.g., “Can you provide more details?”) • It asks about information unrelated to the technical problem • It explores tangential topics not needed for the fix Respond with ONLY this JSON (no extra text): 

{"questions": [{"question_num": 1, "question_text": "<brief quote>", "is_relevant": true/false, "reasoning": "<brief explanation>" }, ... ]}

22 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

A.8. Training Setup 

A.8.1. F OUR -S TAGE REWARD PIPELINE 

We design a four-stage reward pipeline that operationalizes task relevance (RQ1) and answerability (RQ2), plus two auxiliary criteria (non-redundancy and diversity) that prevent reward hacking. Each stage implements rejection filtering: candidates failing to meet a threshold at stage t receive zero reward in subsequent stages, preventing the policy from gaming individual metrics. 

Stage 1: Non-redundancy reward. Redundant questions waste user time by requesting information already available in the task description. We implement a two-pass evaluation for better reliability: 

Pass 1 (Answer extraction): Qwen 3 32B (acting as judge) attempts to answer each generated question using only the underspecified issue description. Questions receive either: (a) substantive answer if information is present, or (b) I don’t know if information is missing. 

Pass 2 (Redundancy classification): The judge evaluates whether questions with substantive answers are genuinely redundant or represent legitimate partial information needs. The redundancy score is: 

rredundancy = 1 − redundant count total questions Generations with rredundancy < 0.5 (more than half redundant) are filtered, receiving zero reward in subsequent stages. 

Stage 2: Diversity reward. Generic questions like Can you provide more details? can pass Stage 1 (they are not redundant) but provide little value because they do not identify specific information needs. Further, models often identify ”safe” questions that can get high rewards for different inputs. The diversity reward aims to penalize similarity between questions from same generation, and within different batches. Due to the technical nature of the questions, embedding-based approaches can lead to false positives/negatives. Thus, we again employ the judge model to identify similarities. High similarity across different issues indicates generic, non-specific questions. The specificity score is: 

rspecificity = 1 − similar count total questions . This pushes the model toward issue-specific questions that reference concrete entities (file names, function names, error types) rather than vague requests. Generations with rspecificity < 0.5 are filtered. 

Stage 3: Answerability reward. We operationalize RQ2’s answerability criterion through a two-pass evaluation: 

Pass 1 (User knowledge simulation): The judge receives the original fully-specified issue and attempts to answer each clarification question from it. 

Pass 2 (Answerability scoring): The judge evaluates whether answers are substantive. The answerability score is: 

ranswerability = answerable count total questions This ensures questions fall within realistic user knowledge bounds, implementing RQ2’s finding. Stage 1 filtering is critical here as without it, redundant questions (which are trivially answerable from the full issue) would receive artificially high answerability scores, allowing the policy to game this reward. 

Stage 4: Task relevance reward. We operationalize RQ1’s importance hierarchy by assigning utility weights based on information categories. The judge classifies each question into our taxonomy categories or marks it irrelevant. Each category receives a weight proportional to its relative mean SHAP value from RQ1 (error information highest, external references lowest). The relevance score aggregates these weights: 

rrelevance = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

w(category i)

23 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

This directly optimizes for questions targeting high-impact information identified in RQ1. Stage 2’s diversity filtering is crucial as without it, the policy could generate safe but similar, generic questions across issues that map to high-weight categories in principle but provide no practical value. The final reward is an equally weighted sum of the reward from each stage. A.8.2. M ODEL ARCHITECTURE AND INFRASTRUCTURE 

We train our clarification question generation model using Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) starting from Qwen3-8B. The training infrastructure consists of three distributed components: • Actor model : The policy model being optimized • Reference model : Frozen copy of the initial policy for KL divergence computation • Reward model : Qwen3-32B used for four-stage reward evaluation We use AdamW with learning rate 5 × 10 −6, batch size 4, gradient accumulation of 4, weight decay 0.01, and ϵ = 10 −8.During training, we generate N = 8 samples per prompt with temperature 0.9 and top-p sampling 0.9. Maximum sequence length is 1024 tokens for input and 256 tokens for generation. We use mean baseline for advantage computation and KL coefficient β = 0 .05 to balance reward maximization with staying close to the reference policy. 

Stage 1: Redundancy Check - Pass 1 (Answer Questions)                         

> System: Answer questions based solely on provided context. If context doesn’t contain enough information, respond with I don’t know .
> User:
> Context: [Task description] Questions: [Numbered list of questions] Based ONLY on the context, answer each question. Format: A1: <answer or "I don’t know"> A2: <answer or "I don’t know"> ...

Stage 1: Redundancy Check - Pass 2 (Evaluate Redundancy)                                 

> System: Evaluate whether questions were already answered by context. Respond ONLY with valid JSON in the exact format shown below.
> User:
> Context: [Task description] Questions and Answers: [Q-A pairs from Pass 1] Count questions with SUFFICIENT answers (not "I don’t know" or "Formatting issue"). These are REDUNDANT. Respond with ONLY this JSON (no extra text): {"redundant_count": <number>, "total": <total>, "explanation": "<brief>"}

24 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Stage 2: Novelty Check 

System: Evaluate question novelty by comparing current questions to previous generations and questions within the same generation set. Respond ONLY with valid JSON. 

User: 

Previous Generations: [Last 2 cached generations] Current Generation: [Current questions] Count how many current questions are SIMILAR to previously asked questions or to other questions in the current generation. Respond with ONLY this JSON (no extra text): {"similar_count": <number>, "total": <total>, "explanation": "<brief>"} 

Stage 3: Answerability Check - Pass 1 (Answer Questions from Original) 

System: Answer questions based solely on the original bug report. If the report doesn’t contain enough information, respond with ”I don’t know”. If a question is generic or doesn’t ask for specific information, respond with ”Generic question”. 

User: 

Original Bug Report: [Original complete issue] Questions: [Numbered list of questions] Based ONLY on the original bug report, determine if the user who filed the report can answer each question. For each question: - If the report contains the information needed to answer: provide the answer - If the report doesn’t have this information: "I don’t know" - If the question is too generic ("provide more details", "clarify requirements"): "Generic question" Format: A1: <answer or "I don’t know" or "Generic question"> A2: <answer or "I don’t know" or "Generic question"> ... Answers: 

Stage 3: Answerability Check - Pass 2 (Evaluate Answerability) 

System: Evaluate whether questions can be answered by the user based on their original bug report. Respond ONLY with valid JSON in the exact format shown below. 

User: 

Original Bug Report: [Original complete issue] Questions and Answers: Q1: [question] A1: [answer from Pass 1] Q2: [question] A2: [answer from Pass 1] ... 

25 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Count questions that are ANSWERABLE by the user (those with actual answers, not "I don’t know" or "Generic question"). Generic questions that don’t ask for specific information are NOT answerable. Respond with ONLY this JSON (no extra text): {"answerable_count": <number>, "total": <total>, "explanation": "<brief>"} Your response: 

Stage 4: Utility Check 

System: You are classifying clarification questions by information type for software issues. Respond with valid JSON only. 

User: 

Task: [Task description] Questions: [Current questions] Classify EACH question by the information need it addresses: INFORMATION TYPES: - error_info: What is going wrong, why, and how? - reproduction: Under what conditions does failure occur? - expected_behavior: What should happen instead? - implementation: How should the solution be implemented? - external_refs: What external systems are relevant? - version_env: What configuration is needed? - irrelevant: Generic, off-topic, or mentions entities not in issue Respond with ONLY this JSON: {"classifications": [{"question_num": 1, "info_type": "<type>"}, ... ]} 

During training and inference, the policy model uses the following system prompt: 

Generation System Prompt 

Generate questions, if any, to ask the user to recover missing information required to solve the task. 

A.8.3. T RAINING REWARD CURVES 

Figure 5 shows the progression of rewards across training. The mean reward increases from approximately 0.2 to 0.6 over 200 training steps, demonstrating that the model successfully learns to generate higher-quality clarification questions through the GRPO objective. Figure 6 breaks down the contribution of each reward stage. 

A.9. Information Needs in CQs A.10. Qualitative Examples 

26 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Figure 5. Mean reward progression during GRPO training. The reward increases steadily, indicating successful policy optimization toward generating non-redundant, novel, answerable, and useful clarification questions. 

(a) Stage 1: Redundancy (b) Stage 2: Novelty (c) Stage 3: Answerability (d) Stage 4: Utility & Specificity 

Figure 6. Stage-wise reward progression during training. Each stage captures a different quality dimension of clarification questions, and the combined optimization across all stages drives the policy toward high-quality question generation. 

Table 11. Distribution of questions across information categories (percentage of total questions). 

Category Weight GPT-5 Nano GPT-5 Ours 

Error Information 1.0 6.0% 10.2% 26.4% Implementation Details 0.6 29.9% 16.4% 12.3% Version/Environment 0.59 11.8% 19.5% 16.1% Expected Behavior 0.58 24.1% 21.5% 16.7% Reproduction Steps 0.42 24.7% 30.2% 19.6% External References 0.23 3.4% 2.2% 5.5% 

27 Asking What Matters: Reward-Driven Clarification for Software Engineering Tasks 

Table 12. Qualitative Analysis of Clarification Questions Across Models. Questions abridged due to space limitations 

Instance GPT-5 Nano GPT-5 Ours 

sphinx-10435 1. Exact versions of Sphinx, Python, Pygments, LaTeX toolchain? Any custom 

latex elements or inline role? [A, ver] 

2. Provide minimal RST snip-pet reproducing the issue with the inline role (e.g., 

:python:‘...‘ ). Do spaces occur without surround-ing text? [R, repro] 

3. Exact PDF build workflow? Commands, Makefile, latexmk usage, and .rst →.tex →.pdf se-quence? Custom scripts? [A, repro] 

4. Limited to Python role or oc-curs with other languages/roles and block highlights? Spaces in HTML output? [U, repro] 

1. Versions (Sphinx, Pyg-ments, TeX engine, OS) and build command for PDF? 

[A, ver] 

2. How is the role defined? Share conf.py config and RST snippet. [A, ver] 

3. Minimal project (one .rst + conf.py) and generated .tex snippet? Explicit spaces or TeX glue in .tex? [U, repro] 

4. When did this start? Which versions didn’t have the is-sue? [A, ver] 

1. Screenshots showing correct vs incorrect output? [A, err] 

2. Reproducible exam-ple with Python role highlighting? [A, re-pro] 

3. Relevant software versions? [A, ver] 

matplotlib-26208 1. Does replacing string x-axis with numeric (e.g., [0,1]) or datetime reproduce? Tied to string labels or stacking/axis in-teraction? [R, repro] 

2. Besides tested orders, tried other combinations (ax1.plot + ax2.stackplot, both on same axis)? Results? [R, repro] 

3. Does this occur with different backends (Qt5Agg, TkAgg) or specific to module backend? 

[U, ver] 

1. Affects only metadata (ax1.dataLim) or ren-dered result? What are ax1.get ybound(), ax1.get ylim() after print? Figure display correct? [U, err] 

2. Reproduce with numeric/-datetime x data instead of strings? Replace df1 index with [0,1] and share dataLim. [U, repro] 

3. Do ax1.relim() and ax1.autoscale view() re-store finite dataLims? Calling before/after ax2 plotting? [U, repro] 

1. N/A 

django-14373 1. Exact year formatting token convention (YYYY/yyyy al-ways 4-digit zero-padded, YY exactly 2 digits)? Other width-affecting tokens? [A, exp] 

2. How to handle edge years: BCE/astronomical (0000, -0001), large years (10000+)? Fixed width or allow wider? [U, exp] 

3. Provide failing test cases: in-put dates, timezones, format strings, expected vs actual, lo-cale/calendar? [U, repro] 

1. Share examples (date/time, format string, current vs expected) for years 0–9, 10–99, 100, negative, 

≥10000? [U, repro] 

2. Intended year field conven-tion: fixed/variable width, signed for BCE, how to rep-resent outside 0000–9999? Align with ISO 8601? [A, exp] 

3. Locale/timezone considera-tions? Tests assume fixed locale/timezone? [U, ver] 

4. Environments showing discrepancy? Backward-compatibility constraints? 

[U, ver] 

1. How does the issue show inconsistency between expected (0-padded) and actual (no padding)? [A, err] 

2. Which compo-nents (YearFormat, YearDeltaFormat) are affected? [A, err] 

Legend: A=Answerable, U=Unanswerable, R=Redundant. Types: err=error info, repro=reproduction, exp=expected behavior, ver=version env. 

28